CHAPTER

6

Verbal Following, Exploring,
and Focusing Skills
Chapter Overview
Chapter 6 introduces verbal following skills and their
uses in exploring client concerns and focusing. This
chapter includes skills for accurately following and
reflecting what clients are expressing and feeling
about their situation. It also introduces skills for
helping clients to consider taking action about
concerns for which they have mixed feelings. These
skills are the building blocks for social workers’ efforts
to communicate empathically with clients. In addition
to being helpful in work with clients in micro practice,
such skills are useful at the mezzo level in work on
behalf of clients, through advocacy, and in work with
colleagues and other professionals. This chapter also
includes references to videos accompanying the text.

●

●

●
●

●

Construct reflective responses that respond to
content and emotions, including both simple
reflections and double-sided reflections.

●

Construct furthering responses, and know when
to use them.

Construct responses to seek concreteness.
Construct responses to provide and maintain
focus.
Construct summarizing responses, and know
when to provide them.

This chapter will give you the information needed to
meet the following practice competencies:
●

●

Construct closed-ended questions, and know
when to use them.

EPAS Competencies in Chapter 6

As a result of reading this chapter, you will be able to:
●

Construct open-ended questions, and know
when to use them.

●

Competency 2: Engage Diversity and Difference
in Practice
Competency 6: Engage with Individuals, Families,
Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Competency 7: Assess Individuals, Families,
Groups, Organizations, and Communities

138




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

MAINTAINING PSYCHOLOGICAL
CONTACT WITH CLIENTS AND
EXPLORING THEIR PROBLEMS
Verbal following involves the use and sometimes
blending of discrete skills that enable social workers
to maintain psychological contact with clients on a
moment-by-moment basis and to convey accurate
understanding of their messages. Moreover, verbal following behavior takes into account two performance
variables that are essential to satisfaction and continuance on the part of the client:
1. Stimulus-response congruence: The
extent to which social workers’ responses provide feedback to clients that
their messages are accurately received.
2.
Content
relevance: The extent to
EP 6
which the content of social workers’
responses is perceived by clients as relevant to
their substantive concerns.
Skills in following have been related to client continuance (Rosen, 1972). Further, incongruent responses
to clients have been more associated with discontinuance (Duehn & Proctor, 1977). Continued use of questions and other responses that are not associated with
previous client messages and that do not relate to the
client’s substantive concerns contribute to consistent
client dissatisfaction. One study of the outcome of
working with persons with drinking problems found
that two-thirds of the variance of outcomes after six
months was predicted by the degree of empathy demonstrated by the counselors (Miller, 1980). Effective use
of attending behaviors and demonstrated empathy
should enhance motivational congruence (the fit
between client motivation and social worker goals), a
factor that is associated with better outcomes in social
work effectiveness studies (Reid & Hanrahan, 1982).
Employing responses that directly relate to client messages and concerns thus enhances client satisfaction,
fosters continuance, and greatly contributes to the
establishment of a viable working relationship. Studies
of practice by social work students of the skills taught in
this book have shown that while most of the practice
skills of second-year students were not significantly
more advanced than those of first-year students, the
second-year students were better able to focus on tasks
and goals, an objective of this chapter, compared with
first-year students (Deal & Brintzenhofeszok, 2004).

139

Clients do not always perceive social worker questions about concerns as helpful. While noting the differences within Asian and Pacific Islander groups,
including those with immigrant and resident status,
Fong (2007) notes that some Asian clients (as well
as members of other groups) may express emotional
conflicts in a physical form. In such cases, the social
worker must be respectful of the client’s experience
with the physical concern as well as explain the rationale for asking questions about factors such as family
background that are not directly related to the physical
complaint (Cormier & Nurius, 2003). The linkage of
these issues to their current symptoms is not clear to
many clients. Some Asian clients conceive of mental
distress as the result of a physiological disorder or character flaws. This issue must be dealt with sensitively
before any useful therapeutic work can occur (Fong,
2007). Similarly, clients who are members of historically oppressed groups may perceive questions as interrogations not designed to help them with their own
concerns but rather as ways to explore whether they
have broken the law or endangered their children.
That is, they may not readily assume that the social
worker is acting as their agent or advocate but rather
as an agent of the state or majority community and
hence a potential danger to their family (Sue, 2006).

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Getting Back to Shakopee,” the
potential client, Valerie, has been referred to an
employee assistance program by her employer.
She asks many questions about who will gain
access to the information shared in their sessions. These questions reflect a concern that
her answers about child care and adult supervision could result in a child welfare investigation.

In addition to enabling social workers
to maintain close psychological contact
with clients, verbal following skills serve
two other important functions in the helping process. First, they yield rich personal
EP 2
information, allowing social workers to
explore clients’ problems in depth. Second, they enable
social workers to focus selectively on components of the
clients’ experiences and on dynamics in the helping
process that facilitate positive client change.




140

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

The following pages introduce a variety of skills
for verbally following and exploring clients’ problems.
Some of these skills are easily mastered. Others
require more effort to acquire. The exercises in the
body of the chapter will assist you in acquiring proficiency in these important skills. Although empathic
responding is the most vital skill for verbally following
clients’ messages, we have not included it in this chapter because it was discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
Later, we discuss the blending of empathic responses
with other verbal following skills to bolster your ability to focus on and fully explore relevant client
problems.

“I see,” “But?,” “Mm-mmm,” “Tell me more,” “And
then what happened?,” “And?,” “Please go on,” “Tell
me more, please,” and other similar brief messages
that affirm the appropriateness of what the client has
been saying and prompt him or her to continue.

Accent Responses
Accent responses (Hackney & Cormier, 2005) involve
repeating, in a questioning tone of voice or with
emphasis, a word or a short phrase. Suppose a client
says, “I’ve really had it with the way my supervisor at
work is treating me.” The social worker might reply,
“Had it?” This short response is intended to prompt
further elaboration by the client.

VERBAL FOLLOWING SKILLS
The discrete skills highlighted in this chapter include seven types of responses:
1. Furthering responses
2. Reflection responses
EP 6
3. Closed-ended responses
4. Open-ended responses
5. Seeking concreteness
6. Providing and maintaining focus
7. Summarizing
We will discuss each of these skills in turn.

FURTHERING RESPONSES
Furthering responses indicate social workers are listening attentively and encourage the client to verbalize.
There are two types of furthering responses: minimal
prompts and accent responses.

Minimal Prompts
Minimal prompts signal the social worker’s attentiveness and encourage the client to continue verbalizing.
They can be either nonverbal or verbal.
Nonverbal minimal prompts consist of nodding
the head, using facial expressions, or employing gestures that convey receptivity, interest, and commitment
to understanding. They implicitly convey the message,
“I am with you; please continue.”
Verbal minimal prompts consist of brief messages
that convey interest and encourage or request
expanded verbalizations along the lines of the client’s
previous expressions. These messages include “Yes,”

REFLECTION RESPONSES
Reflections are used to respond to both content messages and affect. There are several forms of reflection.
We will discuss simple, complex, and double-sided
reflections, as well as reflections with a twist.

Reflections of Content
Reflections of content emphasize the cognitive aspects
of client messages, such as situations, ideas, objects, or
persons (Hackney & Cormier, 2005).1 Reflecting a content message in response to a client’s thoughts does not
mean that you agree with or condone those thoughts.
The following are four examples of reflections of
content:
Example 1
Senior client: I don’t want to get into a living situation
in which I will not be able to make choices on
my own.
Social worker: So independence is a very important
issue for you.
Example 2
Client: I went to the doctor today for a final checkup,
and she said that I was doing fine.
Social worker: She gave you a clean bill of health, then.
Example 3
Native American client: The idea of a promotion makes
me feel good; I could earn more money.
Social worker: So advancement would show that you
are being recognized for the quality of your work.




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

Example 4
Managed care utilization reviewer: We don’t think that
your patient’s condition justifies the level of service
that you recommend.
Social worker: So you feel that my documentation does
not justify the need that I have recommended
according to the approval guidelines you are working from.

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Elder Grief Assessment,” the social
worker asks a recently widowed senior client
what she would like to see occur at the end of
their work together. The client replies: “I would
like to feel better myself, the house looking better, the yard looking better, I would like to go
grocery shopping when I want to, get to the
doctor without calling someone.” The social
worker, Kathy, paraphrases the content by saying, “You would like to remain independent.”

Note that in Example 4, reflection of content is used
as part of the communication with a person whose opinion is important because it relates to delivering client
services—the health insurance care manager (StromGottfried, 1998a). When employed sparingly, reflection
of content may be interspersed with other facilitative
responses to prompt client expression. Used to excess,
however, such reflection produces a mimicking effect.
Reflection is helpful when social workers want to bring
focus to an idea or a situation for client consideration.

Exercises in Reflection of Content
In the following exercises, read each client/colleague
statement and formulate written responses that reflect
the content of the statement. Modeled responses for
these exercises appear at the end of the chapter (see
page 166).
Client/Colleague Statements
1. Client: I can’t talk to people. I just completely
freeze up in a group.
2. Wife: I think that in the last few weeks I’ve been
able to listen much more often to my husband and
children.
3. Senior client: It wasn’t so difficult to adjust to this
place because the people who run it are helpful

141

and friendly and I am able to make contacts
easily—I’ve always been a people person.
4. Mother [speaking about daughter]: When it comes
right down to it, I think I’m to blame for a lot of
her problems.
5. Member of treatment team: I just don’t see how
putting more services into this family makes sense.
The mother is not motivated, and the kids are better off away from her. This family has been messed
up forever.

Reflections of Affect
Reflections of affect focus attention on the affective
part of the communication (Cormier, Nurius, &
Osborn, 2009). In reflections of affect, social workers
relate with responses that accurately capture clients’
affect and help them reflect on and sort through their
feelings. Sometimes social workers may choose to
direct the discussion away from feelings for therapeutic
purposes. For instance, a social worker might believe
that a chronically depressed client who habitually
expresses discouragement and disillusionment would
benefit by focusing less on feelings and more on actions
to alleviate the distress. When the social worker
chooses to deemphasize feelings, paraphrases that
reflect content are helpful and appropriate.
Forms of Reflections
Simple reflections, which identify the emotions
expressed by the client, are a heritage from nondirective, client-centered counseling. That is, they simply
identify the emotion. They do not take a stand or
attempt to help the client deal with the emotion.
They do not go beyond what the client has said or
directly implied (Moyers et al., 2003).

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “How Can I Help?,” social worker
Peter Dimock works with Julie, a client who is
recovering from drug use and is involved with
the child welfare system. When Julie shares her
frustration about all the things she has to do on
her case plan, Peter responds with a simple
reflection that stays close to her message of
being overwhelmed.
Julie: “Well it’s just really hard getting around
with baby and I just, you know, I’ve got a




142

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

lot of stuff that I’m supposed to be doing for
my case plan and I just am having a really
hard time getting to all the places on
time.”
Peter: “Well you’ve been pretty stressed, it
sounds like. Having to do all these things
and get around and make it to all of your
appointments, it’s pretty overwhelming.”

Complex reflections go beyond what the client has
directly stated or implied, adding substantial meaning
or emphasis to convey a more complex picture. These
reflections may add content that focuses on meanings
or feelings that the client did not directly express
(Moyers et al., 2003). For example, when a teenaged
client said, “My mother really expects a lot from me,”
a social worker made a response that added implied
content by saying, “She has high expectations for you;
she thinks that you have a lot of ability.” Verbalizing an
unspoken emotion is a form of reflection that names an
emotion that the client has implied but not stated.
When a teenaged client reflects on what it feels like to
be new to her school by saying, “I’m new here. I don’t
know anyone. I just try to stick to myself and stay out
of trouble,” the social worker could verbalize, “That
sounds to me as if it could be a little lonely,” to tune
in to the unspoken emotion of sadness.
A reframe is another form of adding content.
Here, the social worker puts the client’s response in a
different light beyond what the client had considered
(Moyers et al., 2003). For example, when a client
reported on earlier drug treatment experience, he
emphasized failure, saying, “I have gone through treatment three or four times. Maybe one of these times, I
will get it right.” The social worker chose not to agree
with the failure message but rather reframed to say, “It
sounds as if you have persisted, trying treatment again
after earlier disappointments; you haven’t given up on
yourself.”
Sometimes, the reflection can use a metaphor or
simile to paint a picture of what the client has stated.
For example, when a client commented about his job, “I
just do the same thing every day, nothing ever changes
or ever gets better, always the same,” the social worker
responded, “It sounds like a rat in a maze” (Moyers
et al., 2003). Sometimes the reflection might focus on
amplification, either strengthening or weakening the
intensity of client expression (Moyers et al., 2003). For
example, a client shared, “I am disappointed with how

long this has taken,” and the social worker chose to
emphasize the strength of the implied feeling by saying,
“You are really frustrated and exhausted by all the time
you have put into this with little to show for it.” On the
other hand, when a client expressed doubts about her
abilities, saying, “I never get anything right,” the social
worker chose to agree but weaken its intensity, “Sometimes you doubt whether you can succeed.”
Sometimes clients express indecision and conflict
between several alternatives. In such circumstances, it
is possible to present a double-sided reflection that
captures both sides of the dilemma that is fostering
ambivalence about acting (Miller & Rollnick, 2002).
For example, a teen parent had expressed that she
wanted to succeed both in school and as a parent and
one day become a probation officer or social worker.
On the other hand, in their discussion she had reported
frequent instances of verbal and physical altercations at
school and gang involvement. She described members
of the gang as members of her family. In a double-sided
reflection, the social worker tried to identify the conflicting factors that make consistent decision making
difficult. The social worker responded, “Rhonda, it
sounds as if part of you is doing your best to succeed
in school and act as a responsible parent and plan for
the future. Another part of you is conflicted about
wanting to be true to your friends and, as you describe
them, family members, who are members of the gang.”

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
At a later point in the video “How Can I Help?,”
Julie is commenting on how she is torn about
returning to school to get a GED, seeing both
advantages and disadvantages. She says, “I
don’t know, I guess it would be a good accomplishment, but I just, I don’t know, I just don’t
think, I don’t just think I can do it, like, it’s just
hard. I don’t know.” The social worker, Peter,
reflects the two sides of her feelings by saying,
“So it’s important to you on one hand, and then
on the other hand, you don’t feel confident in
your ability to do it. Is that true?”

Reflections with a twist are reflections in which
the social worker agrees in essence with the dilemma
expressed by the client but changes the emphasis, perhaps to indicate that the dilemma is not unsolvable but
rather that the client has not at this time solved it




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

(Miller & Rollnick, 2013). For example, in the previous
situation with Rhonda, the social worker might add, “It
sounds, Rhonda, as if at this point in time you don’t
feel that you can make a decision about what you
are going to do about interacting with your friends in
the gang.”
These variations on reflections come from the
motivational interviewing (MI) approach (Miller &
Rollnick, 2013). They are useful in circumstances in
which clients or potential clients are considering taking
an action but have not decided on what to do. Rather
than labeling such behavior as resistance, MI considers
ambivalence as an important and useful step in deciding whether to address a situation. From the stages of
change approach, such circumstances are described as
being in a state of either precontemplation, in which a
person has not decided whether an issue exists or
whether they wish to address it, or contemplation, in
which they are aware of an issue but have not decided
whether to take action (De Clemente & Velasquez,
2002). These circumstances occur frequently in social
work practice, but not always. Hence, the skills are presented here as important and useful adjuncts to reflection skills that can be applied when, in the course of
exploration, potential ambivalence about considering
an issue or taking action on it emerges. The spirit of
MI is consistent with social work values of selfdetermination at this point in presenting the role of
the helper as addressing ambivalence and helping the
client consider whether he or she wishes to take action,
without exerting pressure on that decision (Miller &
Rollnick, 2013).

Exercises with Reflections of Affect
In the following exercises, read each client/colleague
statement and formulate written responses that reflect
the affective state of clients. Modeled responses for
these exercises appear at the end of the chapter (see
pages 166–167).
Client/Colleague Statements
1. Client: Whenever I get into an argument with my
mother, I always end up losing. I guess I’m still
afraid of her.
2. Mother [participating in a welfare-to-work program]: I don’t know how they can expect me to
be a good mother and make school appointments,
supervise my kids, and put in all these work hours.
3. Terminally ill cancer patient: Some days I am
really angry because I’m only 46 years old and

143

there are so many more things I wanted to do.
Other days, I feel kind of defeated, like this is
what I get for smoking two packs of cigarettes a
day for 25 years.
4. Elementary school student: Kids pick on me at
school. They are mean. If they try to hurt me,
then I try to hurt them back.
5. Husband: I just can’t decide what to do. If I go
ahead with the divorce, I’ll probably lose custody
of the kids—and I won’t be able to see them very
much. If I don’t, though, I’ll have to put up with
the same old thing. I don’t think my wife is going
to change.

CLOSED- AND OPEN-ENDED
RESPONSES
Generally used to elicit specific information, closed-ended questions define a
topic and restrict the client’s response to a
few words or a simple yes or no answer.
Typical examples of closed-ended questions
follow:
●
●

●
●

EP 7

“When did you obtain your divorce?”
“Do you have any sexual difficulties in your
marriage?”
“When did you last have a physical examination?”
“Is your health insurance Medicare?”

Although closed-ended questions restrict the client
and elicit limited information, in many instances these
responses are both appropriate and helpful. Later in
this chapter, we discuss how and when to use this
type of response effectively.
In contrast to closed-ended responses, which circumscribe client messages, open-ended questions and
statements invite expanded expression and leave the
client free to express what seems most relevant and
important. For example:
Social worker: You’ve mentioned your daughter. Tell
me how she enters into your problem.
Client: I don’t know what to do. Sometimes I think she
is just pushing me so that she can go live with her
father. When I ask her to help around the house,
she won’t, and says that she doesn’t owe me anything. When I try to insist on her helping, it just
ends up in an ugly scene without anything being
accomplished. It makes me feel so helpless.




144

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

In this example, the social worker’s open-ended question prompted the client to expand on the details of the
problems with her daughter, including a description of
her daughter’s behavior, her own efforts to cope, and
her present sense of defeat. The information contained
in the message is typical of the richness of data
obtained through open-ended responding.
In circumstances like the example of a conversation with a managed care utilization reviewer noted
earlier, the social worker can use an open-ended question to attempt to explore common ground that can
lead to a mutually beneficial resolution:
Social worker [to managed care utilization reviewer]:
Can you clarify for me how appropriate coverage
is determined for situations such as the one I have
described?
Some open-ended responses are unstructured,
leaving the topic to the client’s choosing (e.g., “Tell
me what you would like to discuss today” or “What
else can you tell me about the problems that you’re
experiencing?”). Other open-ended responses are structured such that the social worker defines the topic to be
discussed but leaves the client free to respond in any
way that he or she wishes (e.g., “You’ve mentioned
feeling ashamed about the incident that occurred
between you and your son. I’d be interested in hearing
more about that.”). Still other open-ended responses
fall along a continuum between structured and
unstructured, giving the client leeway to answer with
a few words or to elaborate with more information
(e.g., “How willing are you to do this?”).
Social workers may formulate open-ended
responses either by asking a question or by giving a
polite command. Suppose a terminally ill cancer
patient said, “The doctor thinks I could live about six
or seven months now. It could be less; it could be more.
It’s just an educated guess, he told me.” The social
worker could respond by asking, “How are you feeling
about that prognosis?” Polite commands have the same
effect as direct questions in requesting information but
are less forceful and involve greater finesse. Similar in
nature are embedded questions that do not take the
form of a question but embody a request for information. Examples of embedded questions include “I’m
curious about …,” “I’m wondering if …,” and “I’m
interested in knowing.…”
Open-ended questions often start with “What” or
“How.” “Why” questions are often unproductive
because they may ask for reasons, motives, or causes

that are obvious, obscure, or unknown to the client.
Asking how (“How did that happen?”) rather than
why (“Why did that happen?”) often elicits far richer
information regarding client behavior and patterns.

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Home for the Holidays, Part 1,” the
social worker, Kim Strom-Gottfried, asks one
partner about the experience of when she
came out to her parents as a lesbian: “Let me
ask a bit about the coming out conversation.
Sounds like it was not an easy one, yet one
you were able to have. Can you tell me a little
bit more about that?”

Exercises in Identifying Closedand Open-Ended Responses
The following exercises will assist you in differentiating
between closed- and open-ended messages. Identify
each statement with either a C for a closed-ended question or an O for an open-ended question. Turn to the
end of the chapter (page 167) to check your answers.
1. “Did your mother ask you to see me because of the
problem you had with the principal?”
2. “When John says that to you, what do you experience inside?”
3. “You said you’re feeling fed up and you’re just not
sure that pursuing a reconciliation is worth your
trouble. Could you elaborate?”
4. “When is your court date?”
Now read the following client statements and
respond by writing open-ended responses to them.
Avoid using why questions. Examples of open-ended
responses to these messages appear at the end of the
chapter (see page 167).
Client Statements
1. Client: Whenever I’m in a group with Ralph, I find
myself saying something that will let him know
that I am smart, too.
2. Client: I have always had my parents call for
me about appointments and other things I might
mess up.
3. Teenager [speaking of a previous probation
counselor]: He sure let me down. And I really




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

trusted him. He knows a lot about me because
I spilled my guts.
4. Group nursing home administrator: I think that
we are going to have to move Gladys to another,
more suitable kind of living arrangement. We
aren’t able to provide the kind of care that she
needs.
The next sections of this chapter explain how you
can blend open-ended and reflective responses to keep
a discussion focused on a specific topic. In preparation
for that, respond to the next two client messages by
formulating a reflection followed by an open-ended
question that encourages the client to elaborate on
the same topic.
5. Unwed teenage girl seeking abortion [brought in
by her mother, who wishes to discuss birth alternatives]: I feel like you are all tied up with my
mother, trying to talk me out of what I have
decided to do.
6. Client: Life is such a hassle, and it doesn’t seem to
have any meaning or make sense. I just don’t know
whether I want to try figuring it out any longer.
The difference between closed-ended and openended responses may seem obvious to you, particularly
if you completed the preceding exercises. It has been
our experience, however, that social workers have difficulty in actual sessions in determining whether their
responses are open-ended or closed-ended, in observing the differential effect of these two types of
responses in yielding rich and relevant data, and in
deciding which of the two types of responses is appropriate at a given moment. We recommend, therefore,
that as you converse with your associates, you practice
drawing them out by employing open-ended responses
and noting how they respond. We also recommend
that you use the form provided at the end of the chapter (see page 167) to assess both the frequency and
the appropriateness of your closed- and open-ended
responses in several taped client sessions.

Discriminant Use of Closedand Open-Ended Responses
Beginning social workers typically ask an excessive
number of closed-ended questions, many of which
block communication or are inefficient or irrelevant
to the helping process. When this occurs, the session
tends to take on the flavor of an interrogation, with the

145

social worker bombarding the client with questions
and taking responsibility for maintaining verbalization.
Notice what happens in the following excerpt from a
recording of a social worker interviewing an institutionalized youth:
Social worker: I met your mother yesterday. Did she
come all the way from Colorado to see you?
Client: Yeah.
Social worker: It seems to me that she must really care
about you to take the bus and make the trip up here
to see you. Don’t you think so?
Client: I suppose so.
Social worker: Did the visit with her go all right?
Client: Fine. We had a good time.
Social worker: You had said you were going to talk to
her about a possible home visit. Did you do that?
Client: Yes.
When closed-ended responses are used to elicit information in lieu of open-ended responses, as in the preceding example, many more discrete interchanges will
occur. However, the client’s responses will be brief and
the information yield will be markedly lower.
Open-ended responses often elicit the same data as
closed-ended questions but draw out much more information and elaboration of the problem from the client.
The following two examples contrast open-ended and
closed-ended responses that address the same topic
with a given client. To appreciate the differences in
the richness of information yielded by these contrasting
responses, compare the likely client responses elicited
by such questions to the closed-ended questions used
in the previous section.
Example 1
Closed-ended: “Did she come all the way from Colorado
to see you?”
Open-ended: “Tell me about your visit with your
mother.”
Example 2
Closed-ended: “Did you talk with her about a possible
home visit?”
Open-ended: “How did your mother respond when you
talked about a possible home visit?”
Because open-ended responses elicit more information than closed-ended ones, frequent use of the former
technique increases the efficiency of data gathering.




146

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

In fact, the richness of information revealed by the client
is directly proportional to the frequency with which
open-ended responses are employed. Frequent use of
open-ended responses also fosters a smoothly flowing
session; consistently asking closed-ended questions, by
contrast, may result in a fragmented, discontinuous
process.
Closed-ended questions are used chiefly to elicit
essential factual information. Skillful social workers use
closed-ended questions sparingly, because clients usually reveal extensive factual information spontaneously
as they unfold their stories, aided by the social worker’s
open-ended and furthering responses. Although they
are typically employed little during the first part of a
session, closed questions are used more extensively
later to elicit data that clients may have omitted, such
as names and ages of children, place of employment,
date of marriage, medical facts, and data regarding
family of origin.
In obtaining these kinds of factual data, the social
worker can unobtrusively weave into the discussion
closed-ended questions that directly pertain to the
topic. For example, a client may relate certain marital
problems that have existed for many years, and the
social worker might ask parenthetically, “And you’ve
been married for how many years?” Similarly, a parent
may explain that a child began to have irregular attendance at school when the parent started to work
6 months ago, to which the social worker might respond,
“I see. Incidentally, what type of work do you do?” It is
vital, of course, to shift the focus back to the problem. If
necessary, the social worker can easily maintain focus by
using an open-ended response to pick up the thread of
the discussion. For example, the social worker might
comment, “You mentioned that Ernie began missing
school when you started to work. I’d like to hear more
about what was happening in your family at that time.”
Because open-ended responses generally yield rich
information, they are used throughout initial sessions.
They are used most heavily, however, in the first portion of sessions to open up lines of communication and
to invite clients to reveal problematic aspects of their
lives. The following open-ended polite command is a
typical opening message: “Could you tell me what you
wish to discuss, and we can think about it together.”
Such responses convey interest in clients as well as
respect for clients’ abilities to relate their problems in
their own way; as a consequence, they also contribute
to the development of a working relationship.
As clients disclose certain problem areas, openended responses are extensively employed to elicit

additional relevant information. Clients, for example,
may reveal difficulties at work or in relationships with
other family members. Open-ended responses like the
following will elicit clarifying information:
●
●

“Tell me more about your problems at work.”
“I’d like to hear more about the circumstances when
you were mugged coming home with the groceries.”

Open-ended responses can be used to enhance
communication with collaterals, colleagues, and other
professionals as well. For example, Strom-Gottfried
(1998a) suggests using effective communication skills
in negotiation and communication between care providers and utilization reviewers. When a client has not
been approved for a kind of service that the social
worker has recommended, the social worker can
attempt to join with the reviewer in identifying goals
that both parties would embrace and request information in an open-ended fashion:
I appreciate your concern that she gets the best available services and that her condition does not get
worse. We are concerned with safety, as we know
you are. Could you tell me more about how this protocol can help us assure her safety? (Strom-Gottfried,
1998a, p. 398)
It may sometimes be necessary to employ closedended questions extensively to draw out information if
the client is unresponsive and withholds information or
has limited conceptual and mental abilities. However,
in the former case, it is vital to explore the client’s
immediate feelings about being in the session, which
often are negative and impede verbal expression.
Focusing on and resolving negative feelings (discussed
at length in Chapter 17) may pave the way to using
open-ended responses to good advantage.
When you incorporate open-ended responses into
your repertoire, you will experience a dramatic positive
change in your interviewing style and confidence level.
To assist you to develop skill in blending and balancing
open-ended and closed-ended responses, we have provided a recording form to help you examine your own
interviewing style (see Figure 6-1). Using this form,
analyze several recorded individual, conjoint, or group
sessions over a period of time to determine changes
you are making in employing these two types of
responses. The recording form will assist you in determining the extent to which you have used open- and
closed-ended responses.




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

SOCIAL WORKER’S
RESPONSES

OPEN-ENDED
RESPONSES

147

CLOSED-ENDED
RESPONSES

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Directions: Record your discrete open- and closed-ended responses and place a check in the appropriate
column. Agency time constraints will dictate how often you can practice it.

F I G 6- 1 Recording Form for Open- and Closed-Ended Responding
Seeking Concreteness

In addition, you may wish to review your work for
the following purposes:
1. To determine when relevant data are missing and
whether the information might have been more
appropriately obtained through an open- or
closed-ended response
2. To determine when your use of closed-ended
questions was irrelevant or ineffective, or distracted from the data-gathering process
3. To practice formulating open-ended responses you
might use instead of closed-ended responses, to
increase client participation and elicit richer data

SEEKING CONCRETENESS
Many of us are inclined to think and talk in generalities
and to use words that lack precision when speaking of
our experiences (“How was your weekend?” “It was
awesome.”) To communicate one’s feelings and experiences so that they are fully understood, however, a person must be able to respond concretely—that is, with
specificity. Responding concretely means using words
that describe in explicit terms specific experiences,
behaviors, and feelings. As an example, in the following

message, an intern supervisor provides feedback in
vague and general terms: “I thought you had a good
interview.” Alternatively, he might have described his
experience in more precise language: “During your
interview, I was impressed with the way you blended
open-ended with closed-ended questions in a relaxed
fashion.”
You should consider seeking concreteness when
the client uses language that suggests to you that you
may not understand their terms in the way they
intend. This can be particularly true when interviewing children or adolescents whose colloquial expressions may not be entirely clear to the interviewer.
Similarly, nonnative speakers may be conveying ideas
that do not readily translate into the language you are
speaking. In summary, seeking concreteness can be
useful to:
1. Check out perceptions
2. Clarify the meaning of vague or unfamiliar terms
3. Explore the basis of conclusions drawn by clients
4. Assist clients in personalizing their statements
5. Elicit specific feelings
6. Focus on the here and now rather than on the
distant past
7. Elicit details related to clients’ experiences




148

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

8. Elicit details related to interactional behavior
9. Clarify details of timelines, expectations
To test your comprehension of the concept of
concreteness, assess which of the following messages
give descriptive information concerning what a client
experiences:
1. “I have had a couple of accidents that would not
have happened if I had full control of my hands.
The results weren’t that serious, but they could be.”
2. “I’m uneasy right now because I don’t know what
to expect from counseling, and I’m afraid you
might think that I really don’t need it.”
3. “You are a good girl, Susie.”
4. “People don’t seem to care whether other people
have problems.”
5. “My last social worker did not answer my calls.”
6. “I really wonder if I’ll be able to keep from crying
and to find the words to tell my husband that it’s
all over—that I want a divorce.”
7. “You did a good job.”
You could probably readily identify which messages
contained language that increased the specificity of
the information conveyed by the client.
In developing competency as a social worker, one of
your challenges is to consistently recognize clients’ messages expressed in abstract and general terms and to
assist them to reveal highly specific information related
to feelings and experiences. Such information will assist
you to make accurate assessments and, in turn, to plan
interventions accordingly. A second challenge is to help
clients learn how to respond more concretely in their
relationships with others—a task you will not be able to
accomplish unless you can model the dimension of concreteness yourself. A third challenge is to describe your
own experience in language that is precise and descriptive. It is not enough to recognize concrete messages; in
addition, you must familiarize yourself with and practice
responding concretely to the extent that it becomes a
natural style of speaking and relating to others.
The remainder of our discussion on the skill of
seeking concreteness is devoted to assisting you in
meeting these three challenges.

Types of Responses That Facilitate
Specificity of Expression by Clients
Social workers who fail to move beyond general and
abstract messages often have little grasp of the

specificity and meaning of a client’s problem. Eliciting
highly specific information that minimizes errors or
misinterpretations, however, represents a formidable
challenge. People typically present impressions, views,
conclusions, and opinions that, despite efforts to be
objective, are inevitably biased and distorted to some
extent. As previously mentioned, it is common for
many of us to speak in generalities and to respond
with imprecise language. As a consequence, those messages may be understood differently by different people.
To help you conceptualize the various ways you
may assist clients to respond more concretely, the following sections examine different facets of responses
that seek concreteness. In addition to discussing these
aspects, this section includes 10 skill development exercises designed to bring your comprehension of concreteness from the general and abstract to the specific
and concrete.
Checking Out Perceptions
Responses that help social workers clarify and “check
out” whether they have accurately heard clients’ messages (e.g., “Do you mean …” or “Are you saying …”)
are vital in building rapport with clients and in communicating the desire to understand their problems. Such
responses also minimize misperceptions or projections
in the helping process. Clients benefit from social workers’ efforts to understand, because clarifying responses
assist clients in sharpening and reformulating their
thinking about their own feelings and other concerns,
thereby encouraging self-awareness and growth.
Sometimes, perception checking becomes necessary because clients’ messages are incomplete, ambiguous, or complex. Occasionally, social workers may
encounter clients who repeatedly communicate in
highly abstract or metaphorical styles, or clients
whose thinking is scattered and whose messages just
do not “track” or make sense. In such instances, social
workers must spend considerable time sorting through
clients’ messages and clarifying perceptions.
At other times, the need for clarification arises not
because the client has conveyed confusing, faulty, or
incomplete messages, but rather because the social
worker has not fully attended to the client’s message
or comprehended its meaning. Fully attending
throughout each moment of a session requires intense
concentration. Of course, it is impossible to fully focus
on and comprehend the essence of every message delivered in group and family meetings, where myriad
transactions occur and competing communications
bid for the social worker’s attention.




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

It is important that you develop skill in using clarifying responses to elicit ongoing feedback regarding
your perceptions and to acknowledge freely your need
for clarification when you are confused or uncertain.
Rather than reflecting personal or professional inadequacy, your efforts to accurately grasp the client’s
meaning and feelings will most likely be perceived as
signs of your genuineness and your commitment to
understand.
To check your perceptions, try asking simple questions that seek clarification or try combining your
request for clarification with a paraphrase or empathic
response that reflects your perception of the client’s
message (e.g., “I think you were saying ___. Is that
right?”). Examples of clarifying messages include the
following:

messages of others who are present. This may be
accomplished in any of the following ways:
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

“You seem to be really irritated, not only because
he didn’t respond when you asked him to help but
because he seemed to be deliberately trying to hurt
you. Is that accurate?”
“I’m not sure I’m following you. Let me see if
I understand the order of events you
described …”
“Would you expand on what you’re saying so I can
be sure I understand what you mean?”
“Could you go over that again and perhaps give an
illustration that might help me understand?”
“I’m confused. Let me try to restate what I think
you’re saying.”
“As a group, you seem to be divided in your
approach to this matter. I’d like to summarize
what I’m hearing, and I would then appreciate
some input regarding whether I understand the
various positions that have been expressed.”

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Serving the Squeaky Wheel,” the
social worker, Ron Rooney, asks Molly, a client
with a diagnosed serious and persistent mental
illness (SPMI) the following question to verify
his perception: “So you feel that other people’s
ideas about what mental illness means are not
the same as yours?”

In addition to clarifying their own perceptions,
social workers need to assist clients in conjoint or
group sessions to clarify their perceptions of the

By modeling clarifying responses, which occur naturally as social workers seek to check out their own
perceptions of clients’ messages.
By directing clients to ask for clarification. Consider, for example, the following response by a
social worker in a conjoint session:
[To the mother of the daughter who had just spoken]:
“You had a confused look on your face, and I’m not
sure that you understood your daughter’s point.
Would you repeat back to her what you heard and
then ask her if you understood correctly?”

●
●

149

By teaching clients how to clarify perceptions and
by reinforcing their efforts to “check out” the messages of others, as illustrated in the following
responses:
[To group]: “One of the reasons families have communication problems is that members don’t hear
accurately what others are trying to say and, therefore, often respond or react on the basis of incorrect or inadequate information. I would like to
encourage all of you to frequently use what I call
‘checking out’ responses, such as ‘I’m not sure
what you meant. Were you saying …?’ to clarify
statements of others. As we go along, I’ll point out
instances in which I notice any of you using this
kind of response.”
[To family]: “I’m wondering if you all noticed Jim
‘checking out’ what his dad said. As you may
recall, we talked about the importance of these
kinds of responses earlier.
[To father]: I’m wondering, Bob, what you experienced when Jim did that?”

Clarifying the Meaning of Vague or Unfamiliar
Terms
In expressing themselves, clients often employ terms
that have multiple meanings or use terms in idiosyncratic ways. For example, in the message “The kids in
this school are mean,” the word mean may have different meanings to the social worker and the client. If the
social worker does not identify what this term means to
a particular client, he or she cannot be certain whether
the client is referring to behavior that is violent,
unfriendly, threatening, or something else. The precise




150

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

meaning can be clarified by employing one of the following responses:
●

●

●

“Tell me about the way that some kids are mean in
this school.”
“I’m not sure I know what is happening when you
say that some kids act in a mean way. Could you
clarify that for me?”
“Can you give me an example of something mean
that has happened at this school?”

Many other words also lack precision, so it is
important to avoid assuming that the client means
the same thing you mean when you use a given term.
For example, “codependent,” “irresponsible,” “selfish,”
and “careless” conjure up meanings that vary according
to the reference points of different persons. Exact
meanings are best determined by asking for clarification or for examples of events in which the behavior
alluded to actually occurred.
Exploring the Basis of Conclusions Drawn
by Clients
Clients often present views or conclusions as though
they are established facts. For example, the messages
“I’m losing my mind” and “My partner doesn’t love
me anymore” include views or conclusions that the client has drawn. To accurately assess the client’s difficulties, the social worker must elicit the information on
which these views or conclusions are based. This information helps the social worker assess the thinking patterns of the client, which are powerful determinants of
emotions and behavior. For example, a person who
believes he or she is no longer loved will behave as
though this belief represents reality. The social worker’s
role, of course, is to reveal distortions and to challenge
erroneous conclusions in a facilitative manner.
The following responses would elicit clarification
of the information that serves as the basis of the
views and conclusions embodied in the messages
cited earlier:
●

●

“How have you concluded that you’re losing your
mind?”
“What leads you to believe your partner no longer
loves you?”

Note that entire groups may hold in common fixed
beliefs that may not be helpful to them in attempting
to better their situations. In such instances, the social

worker faces the challenging task of assisting members
to reflect upon and to analyze their views. For example,
the social worker may need to help group members
assess conclusions or distortions like the following:
●

●
●
●

“We can’t do anything about our problems. We are
helpless and others are in control of our lives.”
“People in authority are out to get us.”
“Someone else is responsible for our problems.”
“They (members of another race, religion, group,
etc.) are no good.”

In Chapter 13, we discuss the social worker’s role
in challenging distortions and erroneous conclusions
and identify relevant techniques that may be used for
this purpose.
Assisting Clients in Personalizing
Their Statements
The relative concreteness of a specific client message is
related in part to the focus or subject of that message.
Client messages fall into several different classes of
topic focus (Cormier, Nurius, & Osborn, 2009), each
of which emphasizes different information and leads
into very different areas of discussion:
●

●

●

●

Focus on self, indicated by the subject I (e.g., “I’m
disappointed that I wasn’t able to keep the
appointment.”)
Focus on others, indicated by subjects such as they,
people, someone, or names of specific persons (e.g.,
“They haven’t fulfilled their part of the bargain.” )
Focus on the group or mutual relationship
between self and others, indicated by the subject
we (e.g., “We would like to do that.” )
Focus on content, indicated by such subjects as
events, institutions, situations, ideas (e.g., “School
wasn’t easy for me.” )

People are more prone to focus on others or on
content, or to speak of themselves as a part of a
group, rather than to personalize their statements by
using “I” or other self-referent pronouns. This tendency is illustrated in the following messages: “Things
just don’t seem to be going right for me,” “They don’t
like me,” and “It’s not easy for people to talk about
their problems.” In the last example, the client means
that it is not easy for her to talk about her problems,
yet she uses the term people, thereby generalizing the
problem and obscuring her personal struggle.




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

151

In assisting clients in personalizing statements,
social workers have a three-part task:

want to be part of any decision about what
would be a safe environment for you.

1. Social workers must model, teach, and coach clients to use self-referent pronouns (I, me) in talking
about their concerns and their own emotional
response to those concerns. For example, in
response to a vague client message that focuses
on content rather than self (“Everything at home
seems to be deteriorating”), the social worker
might gently ask the client to reframe the message
by starting the response with “I” and giving specific information about what she is experiencing.
It is also helpful to teach clients the difference
between messages that focus on self (“I think …”
“I feel …,” “I want …”) and messages that are
other-related (“It …,” “Someone …”)
2. Social workers must teach the difference between
self-referent messages and subject-related messages
(those dealing with objects, things, ideas, or situations). Although teaching clients to use self-referent
pronouns when talking about their concerns is a
substantive task, clients derive major benefits
from it. Indeed, not owning or taking responsibility
for feelings and speaking about problems in generalities and abstractions are among the most prevalent causes of problems in communicating.
3. Social workers must focus frequently on the client
and use the client’s name or the pronoun you.
Beginning social workers are apt to respond passively to client talk about other people, distant
situations, the group at large, various escapades,
or other events or content that give little information about self and the relationship between self
and situations or people. A more active response
is to request that the client be more specific about
his or her concerns in the present situation related
to the issues raised. In the following illustration,
the social worker’s response focuses on the situation rather than on the client:

A social worker may employ various techniques to
assist clients in personalizing messages. In the preceding example, the social worker used an empathic
response. In this instance, this skill is invaluable to
the social worker in helping the client to focus on
self. Recall that personalizing feelings is an inherent
aspect of the paradigm for responding empathetically
(“You feel ______ about _______ because _____”).
Thus, clients can make statements that omit selfreferent pronouns, and by utilizing empathic responding, social workers may assist clients to “own” their
feelings.

Client: My kids want to shut me up in a nursing
home.
Social worker: What makes you think that?
In contrast, the following message personalizes the client’s concern and explicitly identifies
the feelings she is experiencing:
Social worker: You worry that your children might
be considering a nursing home for you. You

Eliciting Specific Feelings
Even when clients personalize their messages and
express their feelings, social workers often need to
elicit additional information to clarify what they are
experiencing, because certain “feeling words” denote
general feeling states rather than specific feelings. For
example, in the message, “I’m really upset that I didn’t
get a raise,” the word upset helps to clarify the client’s
general frame of mind but fails to specify the precise
feeling. In this instance, upset may refer to feeling
disappointed, discouraged, unappreciated, devalued,
angry, resentful, or even incompetent or inadequate
because of failing to receive a raise. Until the social
worker has elicited additional information, he or she
cannot be sure of how the client actually experiences
being “upset.”
Other feeling words that lack specificity include
frustrated, uneasy, uncomfortable, troubled, and bothered. When clients employ such words, you can pinpoint
their feelings by using responses such as the following:
●
●

●

“How do you mean, ‘upset’?”
“I’d like to understand more about that feeling.
Could you clarify what you mean by ‘frustrated’?”
“Can you say more about in what way you feel
‘bothered’?”

Focusing on the Here and Now
Another aspect of concreteness takes the form of
responses that shift the focus from the past to the present, the here and now. Messages that relate to the immediate present are high in concreteness, whereas those
that center on the past are low in concreteness. Many
of us are prone to dwell on past feelings and events.




152

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

Unfortunately, precious opportunities for promoting growth and understanding may slip through the
fingers of social workers who fail to focus on emotions
and experiences that unfold in the immediacy of the
interview. Focusing on feelings as they occur will
enable you to observe reactions and behavior firsthand,
eliminating any bias and error caused by reporting
feelings and experiences after the fact. Furthermore,
the helpfulness of your feedback is greatly enhanced
when this feedback relates to the client’s immediate
experience.
The following exchange demonstrates how to
achieve concreteness in such situations:
Client [choking up]: When she told me it was all over,
that she was in love with another man—well, I just
felt—it’s happened again. I felt totally alone, like
there just wasn’t anyone.
Social worker: That must have been terribly painful.
[Client nods; tears well up.] I wonder if you’re not
having the same feeling just now—at this moment.
[Client nods in agreement.]
Not only do such instances provide direct access to
the client’s inner experience, but they also may produce
lasting benefits as the client shares deep and painful
emotions in the context of a warm, accepting, and supportive relationship. Here-and-now experiencing that
involves emotions toward the social worker (e.g.,
anger, hurt, disappointment, affectional desires, fears)
is known as relational immediacy. Skills pertinent to
relational immediacy warrant separate consideration
and are dealt with in Chapter 18.
Focusing on here-and-now experiencing with
groups, couples, and families is a particularly potent
technique for assisting members of these systems to
clear the air of pent-up feelings. Moreover, interventions that focus on the immediacy of feelings bring
buried issues to the surface, paving the way for the
social worker to assist members of these systems to
clearly identify and explore their difficulties and (if
appropriate) to engage in problem solving.
Eliciting Details Related to Clients’ Experiences
As previously mentioned, one reason why concrete
responses are essential is that clients often offer up
vague statements regarding their experiences—for
example, “Some people in this group don’t want to
change bad enough to put forth any effort.” Compare
this with the following concrete statement, in which the

client assumes ownership of the problem and fills in
details that clarify its nature:
Client: I’m concerned because I want to do something
to work on my problems in this group, but when I
do try to talk about them, you, John, make some
sarcastic remark. It seems that then several of you
[gives names] just laugh about it and someone
changes the subject. I really feel ignored then and
just go off into my own world.
Aside from assisting clients to personalize their
messages and to “own” their feelings and problems,
social workers must ask questions that elicit illuminating
information concerning the client’s experiencing, such
as that illustrated in the preceding message. Questions
that start with “how” or “what” are often helpful in
assisting the client to give concrete data. For example,
to the client message, “Some people in this group don’t
want to change bad enough to put forth any effort,” the
social worker might respond, “What have you seen happening in the group that leads you to this conclusion?”
Eliciting Details Related to Interactional Behavior
Concrete responses are also vital in accurately assessing
interactional behavior. Such responses pinpoint what
actually occurs in interactional sequences—that is,
what circumstances preceded the events, what the participants said and did, what specific thoughts and feelings the client experienced, and what consequences
followed the event. In other words, the social worker
elicits details of what happened, rather than settling for
clients’ views and conclusions. The following is an
example of a concrete response to a client message:
High school student: My teacher really lost it yesterday.
She totally dissed me, and I hadn’t done one thing
to deserve it.
Social worker: That must have been aggravating. Can
you describe for me the sequence of events—what
led up to this situation, and what each of you said
and did? To understand better what went wrong,
I’d like to get the details as though I had been there
and observed what happened.
In such cases, it is important to keep clients on
topic by continuing to assist them to relate the events
in question, using responses such as “Then what happened?,” “What did you do next?,” or “Then who said
what?” If dysfunctional patterns become evident after




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

exploring numerous events, social workers have a
responsibility to share their observations with clients,
to assist them to evaluate the effects of the patterned
behavior, and to assess their motivation to change it.

●

Specificity of Expression by Social
Workers
Seeking concreteness applies to the communication of
both clients and social workers. In this role, you will frequently explain, clarify, and give feedback to clients. As a
social worker who has recently begun a formal professional educational program, you may be prone to speak
with the vagueness and generality that characterize much
of the communication of the lay public. When such
vagueness occurs, clients and others may understandably
misinterpret, draw erroneous conclusions, or experience
confusion about the meaning of your messages.
Consider the lack of specificity in the following
messages actually delivered by social workers:
●
●

●

“You seem to have a lot of pent-up hostility.”
“You really handled yourself well in the group
today.”
“I think a lot of your difficulties stem from your
self-image.”

Vague terms such as hostility, handled yourself well, and
self-image may leave the client in a quandary as to what
the social worker actually means. Moreover, in this style
of communication, conclusions are presented without
supporting information. As a result, the client must accept
them at face value, reject them as invalid, or speculate on
the basis of the conclusions. Fortunately, some people are
sufficiently perceptive, inquisitive, and assertive to request
greater specificity—but many others are not.
Contrast the preceding messages with how the
social worker responds to the same situations with
messages that have a high degree of specificity:
●

●

“I’ve noticed that you’ve become easily angered
and frustrated several times as we’ve talked about
ways you might work out child custody arrangements with your wife. This appears to be a very
painful area for you.”
“I noticed that you responded several times in the
group tonight, and I thought you offered some
very helpful insight to Marjorie when you said
______. I also noticed you seemed to be more at
ease than in previous sessions.”

153

“We’ve talked about your tendency to feel inferior
to other members of your family and to discount
your own feelings and opinions in your contacts
with them. I think that observation applies to the
problem you’re having with your sister that you
just described. You’ve said you didn’t want to go
on the trip with her and her husband because they
fight all the time, yet you feel you have to go
because she is putting pressure on you. As in
other instances, you appear to be drawing the conclusion that how you feel about the matter isn’t
important.”

When social workers speak with specificity, clarify
meanings, personalize statements, and document the
sources of their conclusions, clients are much less likely
to misinterpret or project their own feelings or
thoughts. Clients like to be clear about what is expected
of them and how they are perceived, as well as how and
why social workers think and feel as they do about
matters discussed in their sessions. Clients also learn
vicariously to speak with greater specificity as social
workers model sending concrete messages.
Both beginning and experienced social workers
face the additional challenge of avoiding inappropriate
use of jargon. Unfortunately, jargon has pervaded professional discourse and runs rampant in social work
literature and case records. Its use confuses, rather
than clarifies, meanings for clients. The careless use of
jargon with colleagues also fosters stereotypical thinking and is therefore antithetical to the cardinal value of
individualizing the client. Furthermore, labels tend to
conjure up images of clients that vary from one social
worker to another, thereby injecting a significant
source of error into communication. Consider the
lack of specificity in the following messages that are
rich in jargon:
●

●

●

●
●

●

“Mrs. N manifests strong passive-aggressive
tendencies.”
“Sean displayed adequate impulse control in the
group and tested the leader’s authority in a positive manner.”
“Hal needs assistance in gaining greater
self-control.”
“The client shows some borderline characteristics.”
“The group members were able to respond to
appropriate limits.”
“Ruth appears to be emotionally immature for an
eighth-grader.”




154

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

To accurately convey information about clients to
your colleagues, you must explicitly describe their
behavior and document the sources of your conclusions. For example, with the vague message, “Ruth
appears to be emotionally immature for an eighthgrader,” consider how much more accurately another
social worker would perceive your client if you conveyed information in the form of a concrete response:
“The teacher says Ruth is quiet and stays to herself in
school. She doesn’t answer any questions in class unless
directly called upon, and she often doesn’t complete
her assignments. She spends considerable time daydreaming or playing with objects.” By describing
behavior in this way, you avoid biasing your colleague’s
perceptions of clients by conveying either vague
impressions or erroneous conclusions.
It has been our experience that mastery of the
skill of communicating with specificity is gained
only through extended and determined effort. The
task becomes more complicated if you are not aware
that your communication is vague. We recommend
that you carefully and consistently monitor your
recorded sessions and your everyday conversations
with a view toward identifying instances in which
you did or did not communicate with specificity.
This kind of monitoring will enable you to set relevant goals for yourself and to chart your progress. We
also recommend that you enlist your practicum
instructor to provide feedback about your performance level on this vital skill.

3. Client: He’s got a terrible temper—that’s the way
he is, and he’ll never change.
4. Client: My supervisor is so insensitive, you can’t
believe it. All she thinks about are reports and
deadlines.
5. Client: I was upset after I left your office last week.
I felt you really didn’t understand what I was saying and didn’t care how I felt.
6. Client: My dad’s 58 years old now, but I swear he
still hasn’t grown up. He always has a chip on his
shoulder.
7. Senior client: My rheumatoid arthritis has affected
my hands a lot. It gets to be kind of tricky when
I’m handling pots and pans in the kitchen.
8. Client: I just have this uneasy feeling about going
to the doctor. I guess I’ve really got a hang-up
about it.
9. African American student [to African American
social worker]: You ask why I don’t talk to my
teacher about why I’m late for school. I’ll tell you
why. Because she’s white, that’s why. She’s got it in
for us black students, and there’s just no point
talking to her. That’s just the way it is.
10. Client: John doesn’t give a damn about me. I could
die, and he wouldn’t lose a wink of sleep.

Exercises in Seeking Concreteness

Skills in focusing are critical to your practice for several reasons. Because your time
with clients is limited, it is critical to make
the best use of each session by honing in on
key topics. You are also responsible for
EP 6
guiding the helping process and avoiding
wandering. Unlike normal social relations, helping relationships should be characterized by purposeful focus
and continuity. As social workers, we perform a valuable role by assisting clients to focus on their problems
in greater depth and to maintain focus until they
accomplish desired changes.
In addition, families and groups sometimes
experience interactional difficulties that prevent them
from focusing effectively on their problems. To
enhance family and group functioning, social workers
must be able to refocus the discussion whenever dysfunctional interactional processes cause families and
groups to prematurely drift away from the topic
at hand.

In the following exercises, read each client statement
and then formulate a written response that will elicit
concrete data regarding the client’s problems. You
may wish to combine your responses with either an
empathic response or a paraphrase. Review the eight
guidelines for seeking concreteness as you complete
the exercise to help you develop effective responses
and conceptualize the various dimensions of this skill.
After you have finished the exercises, compare your
responses with the modeled responses at the end of
the chapter (see page 167).
Client Statements
1. Adolescent [speaking of his recent recommitment to
a correctional institution]: It really seems weird to
be back here.
2. Client: You can’t depend on friends; they’ll stab
you in the back every time.

PROVIDING AND MAINTAINING
FOCUSING




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

To assist you in learning how to focus effectively,
we consider the three functions of focusing skills:
1. Selecting topics for exploration
2. Exploring topics in depth
3. Managing obstacles to focusing
Knowledge of these functions will enable you to focus
sharply on relevant topics and elicit sufficient data to
formulate an accurate problem assessment—a prerequisite for competent practice.

Selecting Topics for Exploration
Areas relevant for exploration vary from situation to
situation. However, clients who have contact with
social workers in the same setting, such as in nursing
homes, group homes, or child welfare agencies, may
share many common concerns.
Before meeting with clients whose
concerns differ from client populations
with which you are familiar, you can prepare
yourself to conduct an effective exploration
by developing (in consultation with your
EP 7
practicum instructor or field supervisor) a
list of relevant and promising problem areas to be
explored. This preparation will help you avoid a mistake
commonly made by some beginning social workers—
namely, focusing on areas irrelevant to clients’ problems
and eliciting reams of information of questionable
utility.
In your initial interview with an institutionalized
youth, for example, you could more effectively select
questions and responses if you knew in advance that
you might explore the following areas:
1. Client’s own perceptions of the concerns at hand
2. Client’s perceived strengths and resources
3. Reasons for being institutionalized and brief history of past problems related to legal authority
and to use of drugs and alcohol
4. Details regarding the client’s relationships with
individual family members, both as concerns and
sources of support
5. Brief family history
6. School adjustment, including information about
grades, problem subjects, areas of interest, and
relationships with various teachers
7. Adjustment to institutional life, including relationships with peers and supervisors
8. Peer relationships outside the institution

155

9. Life goals and short-term goals
10. Reaction to previous experiences with helpers
11. Attitude toward engaging in a working relationship to address concerns
Because the institutionalized youth is an involuntary client, part of this exploration would include the youth’s
understanding of which parts of his or her work are
nonnegotiable requirements and which parts could be
negotiated or free choices (R. H. Rooney, 2009).
Similarly, if you plan to interview a self-referred
middle-aged woman whose major complaint is depression, the following topical areas could assist you in conducting an initial interview:
1. Concerns as she sees them, including the nature of
depressive symptoms such as sleep patterns and
appetite changes
2. Client’s perceived strengths and resources
3. Hopes and vision for a better future without
depression
4. Health status, date of last physical examination,
and medications being taken
5. Onset and duration of depression, previous
depressive or manic episodes
6. Life events associated with onset of depression
(especially losses)
7. Exceptions when depression has not occurred or
occurred less frequently
8. Possible suicidal thoughts, intentions, or plans
9. Problematic thought patterns (e.g., selfdevaluation, self-recrimination, guilt, worthlessness, helplessness, hopelessness)
10. Previous coping efforts, previous treatment
11. Quality of interpersonal relationships (e.g., interpersonal skills and deficiencies, conflicts and supports in marital and parent–child relationships)
12. Reactions of significant others to her depression
13. Support systems (adequacy and availability)
14. Daily activities
15. Sense of mastery versus feelings of inadequacy
16. Family history of depression or manic behavior
Because she is self-referred, this client is likely to be
more voluntary than the institutionalized youth. You
should therefore pay more attention to identifying the
specific concerns that have led her to seek help at this
point in time.
As noted previously, problem areas vary, and outlines of probable topical areas likewise vary accordingly. Thus, a list of areas for exploration in an initial




156

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

session with a couple seeking marriage counseling or
with a group of alcoholics will include a number of
items that differ from those in the first list (the areas
identified for the institutionalized youth). Note that
questions should tap into hopes, resources, exceptions,
and skills as much as concerns and problems.
In using an outline, you should avoid following it
rigidly or using it as a crutch; otherwise, you could
potentially destroy the spontaneity of sessions and
block clients from relating their stories in their own
way. Instead, encourage your clients to discuss their problems freely while you play a facilitative role in exploring
in greater depth any problems that emerge. In particular,
you must use outlines flexibly—reordering the sequence
of topics; modifying, adding, or deleting topics; or abandoning the outline altogether if using it hinders communication. You need to be alert to pacing related to
appropriate depth and breadth, given the time available.
Of course, you cannot always anticipate fruitful
topical areas. After all, although clients from the same
population may share many commonalities, their problems inevitably have unique aspects. For this reason, it
is important to review tapes of sessions with your practicum instructor or a field supervisor for the purpose of
identifying other topical areas you should explore in
future sessions.

Exploring Topics in Depth
A major facet of focusing is centering discussions on
relevant topics to assure that exploration moves from
generality and superficiality to greater depth and meaning. Social workers must have the skills needed to
explore problems thoroughly, because their success in
the helping process depends on their ability to obtain
clear and accurate definitions of problems.
Selectively attending to specific topics is challenging for beginning social workers, who often wander in
individual or group sessions, repeatedly skipping across
the surface of vital areas of content and feelings, eliciting largely superficial and sometimes distorted information. This tendency is illustrated in the following
excerpt from a first session with an adolescent in a
school setting:
Social worker: Tell me about your family.
Client: My father is ill and my mother is dead, so we
live with my sister.
Social worker: How are things with you and your sister?
Client: Good. We get along fine. She treats me pretty
good.

Social worker: How about your father?
Client: We get along pretty well. We have our problems,
but most of the time things are okay. I don’t really
see him very much.
Social worker: Tell me about school. How are you getting along here?
Client: Well, I don’t like it very well, but my grades are
good enough to get me by.
Social worker: I notice you’re new to our school this
year. How did you do in the last school you
attended?
By focusing superficially on the topics of family and
school, this social worker misses opportunities to
explore potential problem areas in the depth necessary
to illuminate the client’s situation. Not surprisingly,
this exploration yielded little information of value, in
large part because the social worker failed to employ
responses that focused in depth on topical areas. In
the next sections, we further delineate the skills that
will considerably enhance a social worker’s ability to
maintain focus on specific areas.
Open-Ended Responses
As we discussed earlier, social workers may employ
open-ended responses throughout individual, conjoint,
and group sessions to focus unobtrusively on desired
topics. Earlier we noted that some open-ended responses leave clients free to choose their own topics,
whereas others focus on a topic but encourage clients
to respond freely to that topic. The following examples,
taken from an initial session with a mother of eight
children who has depression, illustrate how social
workers can employ open-ended responses to define
topical areas that may yield a rich trove of information
vital to grasping the dynamics of the client’s problems.
●

●

●

●

“What have you thought that you might like to
accomplish in our work together?”
“You’ve discussed many topics in the last few minutes. Could you pick the most important one and
tell me more about it?”
“You’ve mentioned that your oldest son doesn’t
come home after school as he did before and help
you with the younger children. I would like to hear
more about that.”
“Several times as you’ve mentioned your concern
that your husband may leave you, your voice has
trembled. I wonder if you could share what you are
feeling.”




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

●

●

“You’ve indicated that your partner doesn’t help you
enough with the children. You also seem to be saying
that you feel overwhelmed and inadequate in managing the children by yourself. Tell me what happens
as you try to manage your children.”
“You indicate that you have more problems with
your 14-year-old daughter than with the other children. Tell me more about Janet and your problems
with her.”

In the preceding examples, the social worker’s
open-ended questions and responses progressively
moved the exploration from the general to the specific.
Note also that each response or question defined a new
topic for exploration. To encourage in-depth exploration of the topics defined in this way, the social worker
must blend open-ended questions with other facilitative verbal following responses that focus on and elicit
expanded client expressions. After having defined a
topical area by employing an open-ended response,
for instance, the social worker might deepen the exploration by weaving other open-ended responses into the
discussion. If the open-ended responses shift the focus
to another area, however, the exploration suffers a setback. Note in the following exchange how the social
worker’s second open-ended response shifts the focus
away from the client’s message, which involves expression of intense feelings:
Social worker: You’ve said you’re worried about retiring. I’d appreciate you sharing more about your
concern. [Open-ended response.]
Client: I can’t imagine not going to work every day.
I feel at loose ends already, and I haven’t even
quit work. I’m afraid I just won’t know what to
do with myself.
Social worker: How do you imagine spending your time
after retiring? [Open-ended response.]
Even though open-ended responses may draw out
new information about clients’ problems, they may not
facilitate the helping process if they prematurely lead the
client in a different direction. If social workers utilize
open-ended or other types of responses that frequently
change the topic, they will obtain information that is
disjointed and fragmented. As a result, assessments
will suffer from large gaps in the social worker’s knowledge concerning clients’ problems. As social workers
formulate open-ended responses, they must be acutely
aware of the direction that responses will take.

157

Seeking Concreteness
Earlier we discussed and illustrated the various facets
of seeking concreteness. Because seeking concreteness
enables social workers to move from the general to the
specific and to explore topics in depth, it is a key focusing technique. We illustrate this ability in an excerpt
from a session involving a client with a serious and
persistent mental illness:
Client: I just don’t have energy to do anything. This
medicine really knocks me out.
Social worker: It sounds as if the side effects of your
medication are of concern. Can you tell me specifically what those side effects have been?
By focusing in depth on topical areas, social
workers are able to discern—and to assist clients in
discerning—problematic thoughts, behavior, and interaction. Subsequent sections consider how social workers can effectively focus on topical areas in exploratory
sessions by blending concreteness with other focusing
skills. In actuality, the majority of responses that social
workers typically employ to establish and maintain
focus are blends of various types of discrete responses.
Empathic Responding
As noted earlier, empathic responding serves a critical
function by enabling social workers to focus in depth
on troubling feelings, as illustrated in the next example:
Client: I can’t imagine not going to work every day.
I feel at loose ends already, and I haven’t even
quit work. I’m afraid I just won’t know what to
do with myself.
Social worker: You seem to be saying, “Even now, I’m
apprehensive about retiring. I’m giving up something that has been very important to me, and I
don’t seem to have anything to replace it.” I gather
that feeling at loose ends, as you do, you worry that
when you retire, you’ll feel useless.
Client: I guess that’s a large part of my problem. Sometimes I feel useless now. I just didn’t take time over
the years to develop any hobbies or to pursue any
interests. I guess I don’t think that I can do anything else.
Social worker: It sounds as if part of you feels hopeless
about the future, as if you have done everything
you can do. And yet I wonder if another part of
you might think that it isn’t too late to look into
some new interests.




158

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

Client: I do dread moping around home with time on
my hands. I can just see it now. My wife will want to
keep me busy doing things around the house for her
all the time. I’ve never liked to do that kind of thing.
I suppose it is never too late to look into other interests. I have always wanted to write some things for
fun, not just for work. You know, the memory goes
at my age, but I have thought about just writing
down some of the family stories.
Note how the client’s problem continued to unfold
as the social worker utilized empathic responding,
revealing rich information in the process. The social
worker also raises the possibility of new solutions, not
just dwelling in the feelings of uselessness.
Blending Open-Ended, Empathic, and Concrete
Responses to Maintain Focus
After employing open-ended responses to focus on
a selected topic, social workers should use other
responses to maintain focus on that topic. In the following excerpt, observe how the social worker employs
both open-ended and empathic responses to explore
problems in depth, thereby enabling the client to
move to the heart of her struggle. Notice also the richness of the client’s responses elicited by the blended
messages.
Social worker: As you were speaking about your son,
I sensed some pain and reluctance on your part to
talk about him. I’d like to understand more about
what you’re feeling. Could you share with me how
it is for you to be talking about him? [Blended
empathic and open-ended response that seeks
concreteness.]
Client: I guess I haven’t felt too good about coming this
morning. I almost called and canceled. I feel I
should be able to handle these problems with Jim
[son] myself. Coming here is like having to admit
I’m no longer capable of coping with him.
Social worker: So you’ve had reservations about coming
[reflection]—you feel you’re admitting defeat
and that perhaps you’ve failed or that you’re
inadequate—and that hurts. [Empathic response.]
Client: Well, yes, although I know that I need some
help. It’s just hard to admit it, I think. My biggest
problem in this regard, however, is my husband.
He feels much more strongly than I do that we
should manage this problem ourselves, and he
really disapproves of my coming in.

Social worker: So even though it’s painful for you,
you’re convinced you need some assistance with
Jim, but you’re torn about coming here because of
your husband’s attitude. I’d be interested in hearing
more about that. [Blended empathic and openended response.]
In the preceding example, the social worker initiated discussion of the client’s here-and-now experiences through a blended open-ended and empathic
response, following it with other empathic and blended
responses to explore the client’s feelings further. With
the last response, the social worker narrowed the focus
to a potential obstacle to the helping process (the husband’s attitude toward therapy), which could also be
explored in a similar manner.
Open-ended and empathic responses may also be
blended to facilitate and encourage discussion from
group members about a defined topic. For instance,
after using an open-ended response to solicit group
feedback regarding a specified topic (“I’m wondering
how you feel about …”), the social worker can employ
empathic or other facilitative responses to acknowledge
the contribution of members who respond to the invitation to comment. By utilizing open-ended responses,
the social worker can also successively reach for comments of individual members who have not contributed (“What do you think about …, Ray?”).
In the next example, the social worker blends
empathic and concrete responses to facilitate in-depth
exploration. Notice how these blended responses bring
out specific behavioral descriptions of the problem. The
empathic messages convey the social worker’s sensitive
awareness and concern for the client’s distress. The
open-ended and concrete responses focus on details
of a recent event and yield valuable clues that the client’s rejections by women may be associated with
insensitive and inappropriate social behavior. Awareness of this behavior is a prelude to formulating relevant goals. Goals formulated in this way are highly
relevant to the client.
Single male client, age 20: There has to be something
wrong with me, or women wouldn’t treat me like a
leper. Sometimes I feel like I’m doomed to be alone
the rest of my life. I’m not even sure why I came to
see you. I think I’m beyond help.
Social worker: You sound like you’ve given up on
yourself—as though you’re utterly hopeless. At
the same time, it seems like part of you still clings
to hope and wants to try. [Empathic response.]




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

Client: What else can I do? I can’t go on like this, but
I don’t know how many more times I can get
knocked down and get back up.
Social worker: I sense you feel deeply hurt and discouraged at those times. Could you give me a recent
example of when you felt you were being knocked
down? [Blended empathic and concrete response.]
Client: Well, a guy I work with got me a blind date for
a dance. I took her, and it was a total disaster.
I figured that she would at least let me take her
home. After we got to the dance, she ignored me
the whole night and danced with other guys. Then,
to add insult to injury, she went home with one
of them and didn’t even have the decency to tell
me. There I was, wondering what had happened
to her.
Social worker: Besides feeling rejected, you must have
been very mad. When did you first feel you weren’t
hitting it off with her? [Blended empathic and
concrete response.]
Client: I guess it was when she lit up a cigarette while
we were driving to the dance. I kidded her about
how she was asking for lung cancer.
Social worker: I see. What was it about her reaction,
then, that led you to believe you might not be in
her good graces? [Concrete response.]
Client: Well, she didn’t say anything. She just smoked
her cigarette. I guess I really knew then that she was
upset at me.
Social worker: As you look back at it now, what do
you think you might have said to repair things at
that point? [Stimulating reflection about problem
solving.]
In the next example, observe how the social worker
blends empathic and concrete responses to elicit details
of interaction in an initial conjoint session. Such
blending is a potent technique for eliciting specific and
abundant information that bears directly on clients’ problems. Responses that seek concreteness elicit details. In
contrast, empathic responses enable social workers to
stay attuned to clients’ moment-by-moment experiencing, thereby focusing on feelings that may present obstacles to the exploration.
Social worker: You mentioned having difficulties communicating. I’d like you to give me an example of a
time when you felt you weren’t communicating
effectively, and let’s go through it step by step to
see if we can understand more clearly what is
happening.

159

Wife: Well, weekends are an example. Usually I want to
go out and do something fun with the kids, but
John just wants to stay home. He starts criticizing
me for wanting to go, go, go.
Social worker: Could you give me a specific example?
[Seeking concreteness.]
Wife: Okay. Last Saturday I wanted all of us to go out to
eat and then to a movie, but John wanted to stay
home and watch TV.
Social worker: Before we get into what John did, let’s
stay with you for a moment. There you are, really
wanting to go to a movie—tell me exactly what you
did. [Seeking concreteness.]
Wife: I think I said, “John, let’s take the kids out to
dinner and a movie.”
Social worker: Okay. That’s what you said. How did
you say it? [Seeking concreteness.]
Wife: I expected him to say no, so I might not have said
it the way I just did.
Social worker: Turn to John, and say it the way you
may have said it then. [Seeking concreteness.]
Wife: Okay. [Turning to husband.] Couldn’t we go out
to a movie?
Social worker: There seems to be some doubt in your
voice as to whether John wants to go out. [Focusing
observation.]
Wife [interrupting]: I knew he wouldn’t want to.
Social worker: So you assumed he wouldn’t want to go.
It’s as though you already knew the answer. [To
husband]: Does the way your wife asked the question check out with the way you remembered it?
[Husband nods.]
Social worker: After your wife asked you about going to
the movie, what did you do? [Seeking concreteness.]
Husband: I said, nope! I wanted to stay home and relax
Saturday, and I felt we could do things at home.
Social worker: So your answer was short. Apparently
you didn’t give her information about why you
didn’t want to go but just said no. Is that right?
[Focusing observation.]
Husband: That’s right. I didn’t think she wanted to go
anyway—the way she asked.
Social worker: What were you experiencing when you
said no? [Seeking concreteness.]
Husband: I guess I was just really tired. I have a lot of
pressures from work, and I just need some time to
relax. She doesn’t understand that.
Social worker: You’re saying, then, “I just needed some
time to get away from it all,” but I take it you had
your doubts as to whether she could appreciate
your feelings. [Husband nods.] [Turning to wife.]




160

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

Now, after your husband said no, what did you do?
[Blended empathic and concrete response.]
Wife: I think that I started talking to him about the way
he just sits around the house.
Social worker: I sense that you felt hurt and somewhat
discounted because John didn’t respond the way
you would have liked. [Empathic response.]
Wife [nods]: I didn’t think he even cared what I wanted
to do.
Social worker: Is it fair to conclude, then, that the way
in which you handled your feelings was to criticize
John rather than to say, “This is what is happening
to me?” [Wife nods.] [Seeking concreteness.]
Social worker [to husband]: Back, then, to our example.
What did you do when your wife criticized you?
[Seeking concreteness.]
Husband: I guess I criticized her back. I told her she
needed to stay home once in a while and get
some work done.
In this series of exchanges, the social worker asked
questions that enabled the couple to describe the
sequence of their interaction in a way that elicited key
details and provided insight into unspoken assumptions and messages.

Managing Obstacles to Focusing
Occasionally you may find that your efforts
to focus selectively and to explore topical
areas in depth do not yield pertinent information. Although you have a responsibility
in such instances to assess the effectiveness
EP 6
of your own interviewing style, you should
also analyze clients’ styles of communicating to determine to what extent their behaviors are interfering with
your focusing efforts. Many clients seek help because
they have—but are not aware of—patterns of communicating or behaviors that create difficulties in relationships. In addition, involuntary clients who do not yet
perceive the relationship as helping may be inclined to
avoid focusing. The following list highlights common
types of client communications that may challenge
your efforts to focus in individual, family, and group
sessions:
●
●
●
●
●

Responding with “I don’t know”
Changing the subject or avoiding sensitive areas
Rambling from topic to topic
Intellectualizing or using abstract or general terms
Diverting focus from the present to the past

●
●
●
●
●
●

Responding to questions with questions
Interrupting excessively
Failing to express opinions when asked
Producing excessive verbal output
Using humor or sarcasm to evade topics or issues
Verbally dominating the discussion

You can easily see how individuals who did not
seek help from a social worker and want to avoid
focusing might use these kinds of methods to protect
their privacy. With such involuntary clients, such behaviors are likely to indicate a low level of trust and a
skepticism that contact with a social worker can be
helpful. You can counter repetitive behaviors and communications that divert the focus from exploring problems by tactfully drawing them to clients’ attention
and by assisting clients in adopting behaviors that are
compatible with their goals for work together. In
groups, social workers must assist group members to
modify behaviors that repeatedly disrupt effective
focusing and communication; otherwise, the groups
will not move to the phase of group development in
which most of the work related to solving problems is
accomplished. Children as clients often respond at first
contact in a limited, passive, nonexpressive style. This
might be interpreted as noncommunicative behavior.
In fact, such behavior is often what children expect to
be appropriate in interactions with strange authority
figures (Evans, 2004; Hersen & Thomas, 2007; Lamb
& Brown, 2006; Powell, Thomson, & Dietze, 1997).

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Hanging with Hailey,” the adolescent client, Hailey, is apprehensive about having
to see a social worker and insists that she has
done nothing wrong. The social worker, Emily,
clarifies that Hailey can choose whether she
wants to see a social worker, that she has not
done anything wrong, but that teachers who
knew her to be a good student have become
concerned that something might have changed
in her life to affect her school performance. By
emphasizing her choice, Emily is able to allow
Hailey to relax enough to share some of what
is going on in her life currently.

Social workers may use many different techniques
for managing and modifying client obstacles. These




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

techniques include asking clients to communicate or
behave differently; teaching, modeling for, and coaching clients to assume more effective communication
styles; reinforcing facilitative responses; and selectively
attending to functional behaviors.
Intervening to Help Clients Focus or Refocus
in Group or Conjoint Sessions
Communications that occur in group or conjoint sessions are not only complex but may also be distractive
or irrelevant. Consequently, the social worker’s task of
assisting members to explore the defined topics fully,
rather than meander from subject to subject, is a challenging one. Related techniques that social workers
can employ include highlighting or clarifying issues
and bringing clients’ attention to a comment or matter
that has been overlooked. In such instances, the objective is not necessarily to explore the topic (although
an exploration may subsequently occur) but rather
to stress or elucidate important content. The social
worker focuses clients’ attention on communications
or events that occurred earlier in the session or immediately preceded the social worker’s focusing response.
This technique is used in the following messages:
●

●

●

●

●

[To son in session with parents]: “Ray, you made
an important point a moment ago that I’m not
sure your parents heard. Would you please repeat
your comment?”
[To individual]: “I would like to return to a remark
made several moments ago when you said
_______. I didn’t want to interrupt then. I think
perhaps the remark was important enough that we
should return to it now.”
[To family]: “Something happened just a minute
ago as we were talking. [Describes event.] We
were involved in another discussion then, but I
made a mental note of it because of how deeply
it seemed to affect all of you at the time. I think
we should consider what happened for just a
moment.”
[To group member]: “John, as you were talking a
moment ago, I wasn’t sure what you meant by
_______. Could you clarify that for me and for
others in the group?”
[To group]: “A few minutes ago, we were
engrossed in a discussion about _______, yet we
have moved away from that discussion to one that
doesn’t really seem to relate to our purpose for
being here. I’m concerned about leaving the other

161

subject hanging because you were working hard to
find some solutions and appeared to be close to a
breakthrough.”
Because of the complexity of communications in
group and family sessions, some inefficiency in the
focusing process is inescapable. Nevertheless, the social
worker can sharpen the group’s efforts to focus and
encourage more efficient use of its time by teaching
effective focusing behavior. We suggest that social
workers actually explain the focusing role of the
group and identify desirable focusing behaviors, such
as attending, active listening, and asking open-ended
questions. During this discussion, it is important to
emphasize that by utilizing these skills, members will
facilitate exploration of problems.
Social workers can encourage greater use of these
skills by giving positive feedback to group or family
members when they have adequately focused on a problem, thus reinforcing their efforts. Indeed, given the difficulties in encouraging some clients to speak even
minimally, some social workers can be so relieved to
have a verbal client that they neglect the focusing skills
that make the session most valuable and useful to the
client. Although group members usually experience
some difficulty in learning how to focus, they should
be able to delve deeply into problems by the third or
fourth session, given sufficient guidance and education
by social workers. Such efforts by social workers tend to
accelerate movement of groups toward maturity, a phase
in which members achieve maximum therapeutic benefits. A characteristic of a group in this phase, in fact, is
that members explore issues in considerable depth
rather than skim the surface of many topics.

SUMMARIZING RESPONSES
The technique of summarization embodies four distinct yet related facets:
1. Highlighting key aspects of discussions of specific
problems, strengths, and resources before changing the focus of the discussion
2. Making connections between relevant aspects of
lengthy client messages
3. Reviewing major focal points of a session and tasks
that clients plan to work on before the next session
4. Recapitulating the highlights of a previous session
and reviewing clients’ progress on tasks during the
week for the purpose of providing focus and
continuity between sessions




162

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

Although employed at different times and in different
ways, each of these facets of summarization serves the
common purpose of tying together functionally related
elements that occur at different points in the helping
process. They are considered in detail in the following
sections.

Highlighting Key Aspects of Problems,
Strengths, and Resources
During the phase of an initial session in which problems and resources are explored in moderate depth,
summarization can be effectively employed to tie
together and highlight essential aspects before proceeding to explore additional concerns and strengths. For
example, the social worker might describe how the
problem appears to be produced by the interplay of
several factors, including external pressures, overt
behavioral patterns, unfulfilled needs and wants, and
covert thoughts and feelings. Connecting these key elements assists clients in gaining a more accurate and
complete perspective of their circumstances.
Employed in this fashion, summarization involves
fitting pieces of the problem together to form a coherent whole. Those concerns can also be matched with a
summary of values and current and potential resources
and strengths identified. Seeing the situation in a fresh
and more accurate perspective often proves beneficial
because it expands clients’ awareness and can generate
hope and enthusiasm for tackling an issue that has
hitherto seemed insurmountable.
Summarization that highlights problems and
resources is generally employed at a natural point in
the session when the social worker believes that relevant
aspects have been adequately explored and clients
appear satisfied in having had the opportunity to express
their concerns. The following example illustrates this
type of summarization. In this case, the client, an
80-year-old widow, has been referred to a Services to
Seniors program for exploration of alternative living
arrangements because of her failing health, isolation,
and recent falls. As the social worker and client have
worked together to explore alternative living arrangements, the pair has identified several characteristics
that would be important for the client in an improved
living situation. Highlighting the salient factors, the
social worker summarizes the results to this point:
Social worker: It sounds as if you are looking for a
situation in which there is social interaction, but
your privacy is also important to you. You want

to maintain your independence. You also want to
have someone available to help in emergencies and
some assistance with cooking and cleaning.
Summarizing responses of this type serve as a
prelude to the process of formulating goals, as goals
flow naturally from problem formulations. Moreover,
highlighting various dimensions of the problem facilitates the subsequent identifications of subgoals and
tasks that must be accomplished to achieve the overall
goal. In the preceding example, to explore an improved
living situation, the social worker would help the client
analyze the specific form of privacy (whether living
alone or with someone else) and the type of social
interaction (how much and what kind of contact with
others) she desires.
Summarizing salient aspects of problems and
resources is also a valuable technique in sessions with
groups, couples, and families. It enables the social
worker to stop at timely moments and highlight the
difficulties experienced by each participant. In a family
session with a pregnant adolescent and her mother, for
example, the social worker might make the following
statements:
●

●

[To pregnant adolescent]: “You feel as if deciding
what to do about this baby is your decision—it’s
your body, and you have decided that an abortion
is the best solution for you. You know that you
have the legal right to make this decision and
want to be supported in making it. You see your
mother as a potential resource and know that your
mother wants to help. You value your independence in decision making and know that she
can’t tell you what decision to make.”
[To mother]: “As you spoke, you seemed saddened
and very anxious about this decision your daughter is making. You are saying, ‘I care about my
daughter, but I don’t think she is mature enough
to make this decision on her own.’ As you have
noted, women in your family have had a hard
time conceiving, and you wish that she would consider other options besides abortion. So you feel a
responsibility to your daughter, but also to this
unborn baby and the family history of conceiving
children.”

Such responses synthesize in concise and neutral
language the needs, concerns, and problems of each
participant for all other members of the session to
hear. This type of summarization underscores the




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

fact that all participants are struggling with and have
responsibility for problems that are occurring, thus
counteracting the tendency of families to view one person as the exclusive cause of family problems.

Summarizing Lengthy Messages
Clients’ messages range from one word or one sentence
to lengthy and sometimes rambling monologues.
Although the meaning and significance of brief messages are often readily discernible, lengthy messages
challenge the social worker to encapsulate and tie
together diverse and complex elements. Linking the
elements together often highlights and expands the significance and meaning of the client’s message. For this
reason, such messages represent one form of additive
empathy, a skill discussed in Chapter 17.
Because lengthy client messages typically include
emotions, thoughts, and descriptive content, you will
need to determine how these dimensions relate to the
focal point of the discussion. To illustrate, consider
the following message of a mildly brain-damaged and
socially withdrawn 16-year-old female—an only child
who is extremely dependent on her overprotective but
subtly rejecting mother:
Client: Mother tells me she loves me, but I find that
hard to believe. Nothing I do ever pleases her; she
yells at me when I refuse to wash my hair alone.
But I can’t do it right without her help. “When are
you going to grow up?” she’ll say. And she goes out
with her friends and leaves me alone in that old
house. She knows how scared I get when I have
to stay home alone. But she says, “Nancy, I can’t
just babysit you all the time. I’ve got to do something for myself. Why don’t you make some friends
or watch TV or play your guitar? You’ve just got to
quit pitying yourself all the time.” Does that sound
like someone who loves you? I get so mad at her
when she yells at me; it’s all I can do to keep from
killing her.
Embodied in the client’s message are the following
elements:
1. Wanting to be loved by her mother yet feeling
insecure and rejected at times
2. Feeling inadequate about performing certain tasks,
such as washing her hair
3. Feeling extremely dependent on her mother for
certain services and companionship

163

4. Feeling afraid when her mother leaves her alone
5. Feeling hurt (implied) and resentful when her
mother criticizes her or leaves her alone
6. Feeling intense anger and wanting to lash out
when her mother yells at her
The following summarizing response ties these elements together:
Social worker: So you find your feelings toward your
mother pulling you in different directions. You
want her to love you, but you feel unloved and
resent it when she criticizes you or leaves you
alone. And you feel really torn because you depend
on her in so many ways. Yet at times, you feel so
angry you want to hurt her back for yelling at you.
You’d like to have a smoother relationship without
the strain.
Occasionally, client messages may ramble to the
extent that they contain numerous unrelated elements
that cannot all be tied together. In such instances, your
task is to extract and focus on those elements of the
message that are most relevant to the thrust of the session at that point. When employed in this manner,
summarization provides focus and direction to the session and averts aimless wandering. With clients whose
thinking is loose or who ramble to avoid having to
focus on unpleasant matters, you may need to interrupt
to assure some semblance of focus and continuity. Otherwise, the interview will be disjointed and unproductive. Skills in maintaining focus and continuity are
discussed in more depth in Chapter 13.

Reviewing Focal Points of a Session
During the course of an individual, conjoint, or group
session, it is common to focus on more than one problem and to discuss numerous factors associated with
each problem. Toward the end of the first or second
session, depending on the length of the initial exploration, summarization is employed to review key concerns that have been discussed and to highlight
themes and patterns related to these problems. Summarizing themes, patterns, and resources expands
each client’s awareness of concerns and tunes them in
to promising avenues for addressing those concerns,
awareness of opportunities, and potential resources.
Through summarizing responses, social workers can
not only review themes, patterns, and resources that
have emerged in their sessions but also test clients’




164

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

readiness to consider goals aimed at modifying these
problematic patterns.

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Getting Back to Shakopee,”
Dorothy, the social worker, summarizes: “You
have had a lot of stress at work with a poor performance review and anxiety that your coworkers are being rude to you over the possibility
that you might get promoted. At home, you are
dealing with your mother, who is living with
you; your son and his girlfriend not working outside of the home and their baby; your daughter
who helps take care of the little ones. All of the
work of keeping up the household comes back
to you. You are not eating, not sleeping very
well, and have lost interest in some things you
used to like to do. You have also been considered for promotion at work in the past and care
deeply for those family members living with and
relying on you.”

In conjoint interviews or group sessions, summarization can also be used effectively to highlight and to
tie together key elements and dynamics embodied in
transactions, as illustrated in the following video case.

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Home for the Holidays, Part 1,”
lesbian partners who come to family treatment
are in conflict about how open to be about
their relationship to their families. Jackie comes
from a family in which there is open communication. She is frustrated with the reticence to
deal openly with feelings that is reflected in
Anna’s family. Kim, the social worker, makes the
following summarizing statement: “Often when
we are forming new families and new couples,
we are torn between the families we come from
and the new family we are creating. This can
play out in logistical decisions about the
holidays.”

Providing Focus and Continuity
Social workers can also use summarization at the beginning of an individual, group, or conjoint session to
review work that clients have accomplished in the last
session(s) and to set the stage for work in the present
session. At the same time, the social worker may decide
to identify a promising topic for discussion or to refresh
clients’ minds concerning work they wish to accomplish
in that session. In addition, summarization can be
employed periodically to synthesize salient points at
the conclusion of a discussion or used at the end of
the session to review the major focal points. In so
doing, the social worker will need to place what was
accomplished in the session within the broad perspective of the clients’ goals. The social worker tries to consider how the salient content and movement manifested
in each session fit into the larger whole. Only then are
the social worker and clients likely to maintain a sense
of direction and avoid needless delays caused by wandering and detours—problems that commonly occur
when continuity within or between sessions is weak.
Used as a “wrap-up” when the allotted time for a
session is nearly gone, summarization assists the social
worker to draw a session to a natural conclusion. In
addition to highlighting and linking together the key
points of the session, the social worker reviews clients’
plans for performing tasks before the next session.
When the session ends with such a summarization,
all participants should be clear about where they have
been and where they are going in relation to the goals
toward which their mutual efforts are directed.

Analyzing Your Verbal Following Skills
After taking frequency counts over a period of time
of some of the major verbal following skills (accent
responses, reflections, responses that seek concreteness,
open- and closed-ended responses, and so on), you are
ready to assess the extent to which you employ, blend,
and balance these skills in relation to each other. On
the form for recording verbal following (Figure 6-2),
categorize each of your responses from a recorded session. As you analyze your relative use and blending of
responses alone or with your practicum instructor,
determine whether certain types of responses were
used either too frequently or too sparingly. Think of
steps you might take to correct any imbalances in
your utilization of skills for future sessions.




OPEN-ENDED
RESPONSES

CLOSED-ENDED
RESPONSES

EMPATHIC
RESPONSES

LEVEL OF
EMPATHY

CONCRETE
RESPONSES

SUMMARIZING
RESPONSES

OTHER TYPES
OF RESPONSES

FIG 6 -2 Recording Form for Verbal Following Skills

Directions: Categorize each of your responses from a recorded session. Where responses involve more than one category (blended responses), record them as a single response, but
also check each category embodied in the response. Excluding the responses checked as “Other Type of Responses,” analyze whether certain types of responses were utilized too
frequently or too sparingly. Define tasks for yourself to correct imbalances in future sessions. Retain a copy of the form so that you can monitor your progress in mastering verbal
following skills over an extended period of time.

7.

6.

5.

4.

3.

2.

1.

CLIENT
MESSAGE

C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

165




166

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

SUMMARY
This chapter has helped you learn how to explore,
reflect, and appropriately use closed- and open-ended
responses as means to better focusing, following, and
summarizing in your social work practice. These skills
may be applied both with clients and with other persons
and colleagues on behalf of clients. In Chapter 7, we will
explore some common difficulties experienced by beginning social workers and some ways to overcome them.

COMPETENCY NOTES
EP 2

Engage Diversity and Difference in Practice
●

●

●

EP 6

Engage with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
●

●

EP 7

Apply and communicate understanding of
the importance of diversity and difference
in shaping life experiences in practice at the
micro, mezzo, and macro levels.
Present oneself as a learner, and engage clients and constituencies as experts on their
own experiences.
Apply self-awareness and self-regulation to
manage the influence of personal biases and
values in working with diverse clients and
constituencies.

Apply knowledge of human behavior and the
social environment, person-in-environment,
and other multidisciplinary theoretical
frameworks to engage with clients and
constituencies.
Use empathy, reflection, and interpersonal
skills to effectively engage diverse clients
and constituencies.

Assess Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
●

Collect and organize data, and apply critical
thinking to interpret information from clients and constituencies.

MODELED SOCIAL WORKER
Responses to Exercises in Reflection
of Content
1. “You just get so uptight in a group you don’t
function.”
2. “So you’ve made some real progress in tuning in to
your husband and children.”

3. “So people’s helpfulness here and your own skills
in meeting people have helped your adjustment
here.”
4. “So you see yourself as having contributed to many
of her problems.”
5. “It sounds as if your experience causes you to
doubt whether more services would be helpful.
Could you tell me about your conclusion that the
mother is not motivated?”

MODELED SOCIAL WORKER
Responses to Exercises with Reflection
of Affect
1. “Because your fears really block you when you
argue with your mother, you seem to feel anxious
and frustrated.” [simple reflection]
2. “So you feel caught by competing parenting and
work responsibilities; if you meet all your work
hours, you are concerned about how it affects
your parenting. If you do what you think you
should as a parent, it can conflict with work
requirements.” [double-sided reflection]
3. “So sometimes you feel cheated by life, and at
other times that your illness is a consequence for
your smoking history.” [double-sided reflection]
4. “So it sounds as if it has not been easy for you to
relax and have friends in this school; when they
have acted in a way that feels mean to you,
you have felt a need to act to protect yourself.”
[simple reflection]
5. “You’re really torn and wonder if not seeing the
children very often is too high a price to pay for
a divorce. On the other hand, you fear that if you
stay with her, there won’t be any improvement.
Right now you don’t see a way out of this
dilemma.” [reflection with a twist]

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES IN
Identifying Closed- and Open-Ended
Responses
Statement
1

Response
C

2

O

3

O

4

C




C H A P T E R 6 / Verbal Following, Exploring, and Focusing Skills

MODELED SOCIAL WORKER
Responses to Exercises
in Identifying Closed- and
Open-Ended Responses
1. “Could you tell me more about your wanting to
impress Ralph?”
2. “What are you afraid you’d do wrong?”
3. “Given your experience with that probation officer,
how would you like your relationship with me
to be?”
4. “So you feel that your facility cannot provide what
Gladys needs. Can you describe the kind of care
you believe she needs?”
5. “So you don’t trust that I want to try to help you
make what you feel will be the best decision. Can
you tell me what I have done that has caused you
to think that your mother and I are allies?”
6. “You sound as if you are at a pretty hopeless
point right now. When you say you don’t know
if you want to keep trying to figure it out, can
you tell me more about what you are thinking
about doing?”

MODELED SOCIAL WORKER
Responses to Exercises in Seeking
Concreteness
1. “Can you tell me how it feels weird to you?”
2. “I gather you feel that your friends have let you
down in the past. Could you give me a recent
example in which this has happened?”
3. “Could you tell me more about what happens when
he loses his temper with you?” or “You sound like

167

you don’t have much hope that he’ll ever get control
of his temper. How have you concluded he will
never change?” [A social worker might explore
each aspect of the message separately.]
4. “Could you give me some examples of how she is
insensitive to you?”
5. “Sounds like you’ve been feelinghurt and disappointed
over my reaction last week. I can sense you’re struggling with those same feelings right now.”
6. “It sounds as if you feel that your dad’s way of
communicating with you is unusual for someone
his age. Could you recall some recent examples of
times you’ve had difficulties with how he communicates with you?”
7. “It sounds as if the arthritis pain is aggravating and
blocking what you normally do. When you say
that handling the pots and pans is kind of tricky,
can you tell me about recent examples of what has
happened when you are cooking?”
8. “Think of going to the doctor just now. Let your
feelings flow naturally. [Pause.] What goes on
inside you—your thoughts and feelings?”
9. “So you see it as pretty hopeless. You feel pretty
strongly about Ms. Wright. I’d be interested in
hearing what’s happened that has led you to the
conclusion she’s got it in for black students.”
10. “So you feel as if you’re nothing in his eyes. I’m
wondering how you’ve reached that conclusion?”

NOTE
1. In previous editions we referred to reflections of
content responses as paraphrases if they were
being used to provide fresh words to restate the
client’s content message concisely.




104

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

3. Tearful female client who is a mother: When I
was a teenager, I thought that when I was married
and had my own children, I would never yell at
them like my mother yelled at me. Yet here I am
doing the same things with Sonny.
Apparent feelings:
Probable deeper feelings:
4. African American client in child welfare system:
The system is against people like me. People think
that we drink, beat our kids, lay up on welfare, and
take drugs.
Apparent feelings:
Probable deeper feelings:
Exercises at the end of this chapter for formulating
reciprocal empathic responses will also assist you in
increasing your perceptiveness to feelings.

continuum ranging from high- to low-level skills,
represented a major breakthrough not only in operationalizing essential social worker skills but also in
establishing a relationship between these skills and successful outcomes in practice. The empathic communication scale has been employed to help students
distinguish between high- and low-level empathic
responses and has been used by peers and instructors
in group training to assess levels of students’ responses.
Students then receive guidance in reformulating
responses to bring them to higher levels.
The Carkhuff (1969) empathy scale, which consists
of nine levels, has been widely used in training and
research. Although we have found nine-point scales
valuable as training aids, they have proven somewhat
confusing to students, who often have difficulty in
making such fine distinctions between levels. For this
reason, we have adapted the nine-level scale described
by Hammond, Hepworth, and Smith (1977) by collapsing it to the five-level scale presented here.

Empathic Communication Scale

ACCURATELY CONVEYING
EMPATHY
Empathic responding is a fundamental yet
complex skill that requires systematic practice and extensive effort to achieve competency. Skill in empathic communication
has no limit or ceiling; rather, this skill
EP 6
is always in the process of “becoming.” In
listening to their taped sessions, even highly skilled
professionals discover feelings they overlooked. Many
social workers, however, do not fully utilize empathic
responding. They fail to grasp the versatility of this skill
and its potency in influencing clients and fostering
growth in moment-by-moment transactions.
In fact, some social workers dismiss the need for
training in empathic responding, mistakenly believing
themselves to already be empathic in their contacts
with clients. Few people are inherently helpful in the
sense of relating naturally with high levels of empathy
or any of the other core conditions. Although people
achieve varying degrees of empathy, respect, and genuineness through their life experiences, attaining high
levels of these skills requires rigorous training. Research
scales that operationalize empathy conditions have
been developed and validated in extensive research
studies (Duan & Hill, 1996; Truax & Carkhuff, 1967).
These scales, which specify levels of empathy along a

Level 0: Lack of Empathic Responding
We created this level because we have observed that
some contact lacks empathy or is in fact antiempathic. There can be circumstances where the
norm in the setting and/or the skill and the beliefs of
the social worker are such that it is not assumed to
be the purview of the helping professional to convey
empathy or understanding. Indeed, it can be the practice to actively challenge client perceptions if those are
considered invalid or antisocial. We do not condone
such expression and organizational norms and consider them to be counterproductive. Our disapproval
of such expression does not mean it does not exist,
however. We discuss it here so that you will be aware
of it and, if you witness it, reflect on what alternatives
to such communication exist.
Unfortunately, Level 0 responses occur with some
frequency in settings in which clients are involuntary,
stigmatized, or considered deviant. Such responses may
provoke client anger but pose few consequences for the
social worker unless there are norms that clients must
be treated respectfully in all circumstances. We share
these responses here not for the purpose of modeling
them but rather to alert you that if you see them occurring or find yourself participating in them, they signal
problems with the social worker or the setting. Such
responses could just be the product of a social worker
having a bad day, but they may represent a standard of




C H A P T E R 5 / Building Blocks of Communication: Conveying Empathy and Authenticity

practice that passes unnoticed. Consider the following
example of a mother in the child welfare system who
has recently completed a drug treatment program.
Client: I want to go into an aftercare treatment program near my home that is culturally sensitive and
allows me to keep my job.
Level 0 response: You should not be thinking about
what is convenient for you but rather what might
ultimately benefit your child by your being a safe
parent for her. Your thinking here is symptomatic
of the problem of why your child is in custody, and
your chances of regaining custody are limited.
This response does not convey empathy. It is
actively judgmental and inappropriately confrontational. It is possible that the social worker might have
valid reasons for wishing the client to consider a variety
of options. However, making the judgmental statement
only makes the circumstances worse and makes it
unlikely that the client will consider the social worker’s
opinion. Social workers’ frustration with clients who
endanger others is understandable. Statements like the
one above, however, greatly hinder further efforts to
work with them in a collaborative fashion.
Level 1: Low Level of Empathic Responding
At Level 1, the social worker communicates limited
awareness or understanding of the client’s feelings;
the social worker’s responses are irrelevant and often
abrasive, hindering rather than facilitating communication. Operating from a personal frame of reference, the
social worker changes the subject, argues, gives advice
prematurely, lectures, or uses other ineffective styles
that block communication, often diverting clients
from their problems and fragmenting the helping
process. Furthermore, the social worker’s nonverbal
responses are not appropriate to the mood and content
of the client’s statement.
When social workers relate at this low level, clients
often become confused or defensive. They may react by
discussing superficialities, arguing, disagreeing, changing the subject, or withdrawing into silence. Thus, the
client’s energies are diverted from exploration and/or
work on problems.
In the previous example, if the social worker were
to respond to the client seeking a culturally sensitive
treatment option near her home with “I see that you
want to find a program near your home,” that would
be a Level 1 response. This response is minimally

105

facilitative but at least avoids the judgmental statements of the previous example.
Here is another example to consider, with a number of Level 1 responses.
African American male client [to child welfare worker]:
I don’t trust you people. You do everything you can
to keep me from getting back my son. I have done
everything I am supposed to do, and you people
always come up with something else.

Level 1 Responses:
●

●

●

●

●

“Just carry out the case plan and you are likely to
succeed.” (Giving advice)
“Just think what would have happened if you had
devoted more energy in the last year to carrying
out your case plan: You would have been further
along.” (Persuading with logical argument; negatively evaluating client’s actions)
“How did you get along with your last social
worker?” (Changing the subject)
“Don’t you think it will all work out in time?”
(Leading question, untimely reassurance)
“Why, that’s kind of an exaggeration. If you just
work along with me, before you know it things will
be better.” (Reassuring, consoling, giving advice)

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
You can see two versions of the same situation
in the video “Domestic Violence and the Probation Officer.” In the first version, note the client’s
reaction to the social worker’s Level 0 response.
Note how the situation looks different when the
social worker employs higher levels of empathy
in the second version of the situation.

The preceding examples illustrate ineffective styles
of communication used at this low level. Notice that
messages reflect the social worker’s own formulations
concerning the client’s problem; they do not capture
the client’s inner experiencing. Such responses stymie
clients, blocking their flow of thought and producing
negative feelings toward the social worker.
Level 2: Moderately Low Level of Empathic
Responding
At Level 2, the social worker responds to the client’s
surface message but erroneously omits feelings or




106

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

factual aspects of the message. The social worker may
also inappropriately qualify feelings (e.g., “somewhat,”
“a little bit,” “kind of”) or may inaccurately interpret
feelings (e.g., “angry” for “hurt,” “tense” for “scared”).
Responses may also emanate from the social worker’s
own conceptual formulations, which may be diagnostically accurate but not empathically attuned to the client’s expressions. Although Level 2 responses are only
partially accurate, they do convey an effort to understand and, for this reason, do not completely block the
client’s communication or work on problems.
Consider the following Level 2 responses to the
earlier example of the African American male client
expressing his feelings about the child welfare system.

Level 2 Responses:
●

●

●

●

●

●

“You’ll just have to be patient. I can see you’re
upset.” The word upset defines the client’s feelings
only vaguely, whereas feeling words such as angry,
furious, and discounted more accurately reflect the
client’s inner experiencing.
“You feel angry because your case plan has not been
more successful to date. Maybe you are expecting
too much too soon; there is a lot of time yet.’’ The
listener begins to accurately capture the client’s
feelings but then moves to an evaluative interpretation (“you expect too much too soon”) and inappropriate reassurance.
“You aren’t pleased with your progress so far?” This
response focuses on external, factual circumstances
to the exclusion of the client’s feelings or perceptions regarding the event in question.
“You feel like things aren’t going too well.” This
response contains no reference to the client’s
immediately apparent feelings. Beginning social
workers often use the lead-in phrase “You feel
like …” without noticing that, in employing it,
they have not captured the client’s feelings.
“You’re disappointed because you haven’t gotten
your son back?” This response, although partially
accurate, fails to capture the client’s anger and distrust of the system, wondering whether any of his
efforts are likely to succeed.
“I can see you are angry and disappointed because
your efforts haven’t been more successful so far, but
I think you may be expecting the system to work too
quickly.” Although the message has a strong beginning, the empathic nature of the response is
negated by the listener’s explanation of the reason
for the client’s difficulties. This response represents

a form of taking sides—that is, justifying the
actions of the child welfare system by suggesting
that too much is expected of it.

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Getting Back to Shakopee,” the
social worker, Dorothy, listens as her client provides an account of her uncomfortable relations
with her coworkers. She summarizes and adds
a Level 2 empathic comment: “So just that I
understand what you are talking about, you
were working on your own project and Mary
came over and added hers to yours and asked
you to finish it for her? What did that do for
you?” The empathy is implied in the social worker’s question, but it could have been more
explicit. For example, Dorothy might have
asked, “Did you feel disrespected by how she
acted toward you?”

The preceding responses illustrate many of the
common errors made by social workers in responding
empathically to client messages. Although some part
of the messages may be accurate or helpful, all the
responses in some way ignore or subtract from what
the client is experiencing.
Level 3: Interchangeable or Reciprocal Level
of Empathic Responding
The social worker’s verbal and nonverbal responses at
Level 3 convey understanding and are essentially interchangeable with the client’s obvious expressions, accurately reflecting factual aspects of the client’s messages
and surface feelings or state of being. Reciprocal
responses do not appreciably add affect or reach
beyond the surface feelings, nor do they subtract from
the feeling and tone expressed.
Acknowledging the factual content of the client’s
message, although desirable, is not required; if included, this aspect of the message must be accurate.
Level 3 responses facilitate further exploratory and
problem-focused responses by the client. The beginning social worker does well in achieving skill in reciprocal empathic responding, which is an effective
working level. Consider the following examples of
Level 3 responses.




C H A P T E R 5 / Building Blocks of Communication: Conveying Empathy and Authenticity

Level 3 Responses:
●

●

“You’re really angry about the slow progress in your
case and are wondering whether your efforts are
likely to succeed.”
“I can tell you feel very let down and are asking
yourself, ‘Will I ever get my son back?’ ”

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
The video “Serving the Squeaky Wheel” contains
a lengthy exchange in which the client, Molly,
expresses her suspicion about what is written
about her in the social worker’s case records.
The social worker responds, “I am hearing that
it is a real sore point with you about what I
write and think and what goes into the records
about you.” This is a Level 3 response that deals
directly with her concern.

Level 3 responses such as these express accurately the immediately apparent emotions in the client’s message. The content of the responses is also
accurate, but deeper feelings and meanings are not
added. The second response above also illustrates a
technique for conveying empathy that involves
changing the reflection from the third to the first
person, and speaking as if the social worker were the
client.
Level 4: Moderately High Level of Empathic
Responding
Responses at Level 4 are somewhat additive,
accurately identifying the client’s implicit underlying
feelings and/or aspects of the problem. The social
worker’s response illuminates subtle or veiled facets
of the client’s message, enabling the client to get in
touch with somewhat deeper feelings and unexplored
meanings and purposes of behavior. Level 4 responses
thus are aimed at enhancing self-awareness. Consider
the following example of a Level 4 response.

Level 4 Response:
●

“You feel very frustrated with the lack of progress
in getting your son back. You wonder whether
there is any hope in working with a new worker
and this system, which you feel hasn’t been helping
you.”

107

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Serving the Squeaky Wheel,” the
client, Molly, says that other people’s conceptions of mental illness do not include her. The
social worker responds, “Let me see if I understand what you are saying: Some people may
think because you have a car and you speak
up for yourself, that you are a very competent
person who doesn’t need any resources [Client:
“There you go.”] and if you ask for them [Client: “I
am screwing the system.”] that you are trying to
take things that you are not entitled to. But your
view is that you can have a car and speak up for
yourself and still have other needs.” This Level 4
response not only conveys immediately apparent feelings and content but also is noticeably
additive in reflecting the client’s deeper feelings.
In this case, the client’s immediate response—
finishing the practitioner’s sentences—indicates
that the empathic response is perceived as
accurate.

Level 5: High Level of Empathic Responding
Reflecting each emotional nuance and using voice and
intensity of expressions finely attuned to the client’s
moment-by-moment experiencing, the social worker
accurately responds to the full range and intensity of
both surface and underlying feelings and meanings at
Level 5. The social worker may connect current feelings
and experiencing to previously expressed experiences or
feelings, or may accurately identify implicit patterns,
themes, or purposes. Responses may also identify
implicit goals embodied in the client’s message, which
point out a promising direction for personal growth and
pave the way for action. Responding empathically at
this high level facilitates the client’s exploration of feelings and problems in much greater breadth and depth
than responding at lower levels. Conveying this level of
empathy occurs rarely with inexperienced interviewers
and only somewhat more often with highly experienced
interviewers. It should be noted that conveying higher
levels of empathy can also be a factor of the setting and
expectations as well as social worker skill. The opportunity to respond at higher levels of empathy is more
likely to occur near the end of an interview and with
clients who have become more voluntary. As you consult your notes, with notations of key words, you can




108

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

sometimes convey an empathic summary near the end
of a session that captures themes and emotions, both
expressed and implied. Consider the following example
of a Level 5 response.

Level 5 Response:

An example of a Level 5 response can be found in the
following video case.

VIDEO CASE EXAMPLE
In the video “Serving the Squeaky Wheel,” Molly,
a client with serious and persistent mental illness, acts, as she puts it, as a “greasy wheel,”
always advocating for herself and acting assertively, as she has been trained to do in many
education programs. And yet those skills act as a
“two- or three-edged sword” in that sometimes
she is punished for this assertiveness. Reflecting
these themes and Molly’s language, the social
worker, Ron Rooney, says, “You just seem to be
courageous in fighting battles, and you have
learned some skills in assertiveness, and as you
say, that can be a two-edged or three-edged
sword. Sometimes your assertiveness gets you
what you want and sometimes your assertiveness causes some people to look at you as the
squeaky wheel that has squeaked too much.”

Exercises in Discriminating Levels
of Empathic Responding
The following exercises ask you to rate responses for
their level of empathy and are designed to assist you
in refining your ability to determine the helpfulness of
responses. These exercises will prepare you for subsequent practice in formulating your own empathic messages. Three client statements are given, followed by
several possible responses. Using the empathic scale,
rate each response from Level 0 to Level 5. Rating messages will be less difficult if, using the list of affective
words and phrases, you first identify the feelings contained in the client’s message. After you have rated
each response, compare your rating with those given
at the end of the chapter (see page 137). Referring to
the rating scale, analyze the responses you rated inaccurately, trying to pinpoint the reason for the authors’
ratings. Additional exercises are available in the Practice Behaviors Workbook.

Client Statement

1. Single woman, age 80 [to social worker concerning
her request to move to an independent living
complex provided for ambulatory older persons]:
Goodness, the more I think of moving, the more
scared I get. I have neighbors here who look after
me, and I won’t know a soul there. I’m afraid
I’ll be all alone.

Possible Responses

1. “It’s pretty scary to you, leaving your neighbors
and familiar surroundings. But there will be a lot
of friendly people there and things to do. Besides,
they fix one hot meal for you every day.”
2. “Don’t worry, you’ll make friends in no time, and
you’ll wish you’d moved sooner.”
3. “Did you sign those application papers I left with
you a few days ago?”
4. “Just thinking about moving worries you because
you’ll be leaving your own neighborhood and
friends. Even though your life would be much easier, you’re unsure you’ll be better off in other
ways.”
5. “So I gather in some ways you’d rather stay right
where you are rather than gamble on a change.”
6. “Lots of other people in the new apartments were
just as scared as you before they moved, but I don’t
know a single one who’s sorry now.”
7. “It sounds as though you have some pretty mixed
feelings about moving. Part of you wants to go
because you could live more comfortably, but
another part of you is afraid you’ll feel alone and
lost and wants to cling to people you know care
about you.”
8. “Are you saying we just ought to forget the whole
thing?”

Client Statement

2. Male, age 16 [in weekly visit to social work probation officer]: I don’t see the sense in having to come
here every (expletive) week. I haven’t been in any
trouble now since I went to court a month ago.
You should know by now you can trust me.

Possible Responses

1. “A month isn’t very long, you know. And how can
I be sure you’re staying out of trouble?”
2. “I gather you’d rather not have to see me. I can
understand that, but the judge ordered it and




C H A P T E R 5 / Building Blocks of Communication: Conveying Empathy and Authenticity

you’d be in trouble with him if you didn’t meet the
conditions of your probation.”
3. “Has it been a month since you went to court?
I didn’t think that it had been that long.”
4. “You’d prefer not coming here and feel you’ve
earned my trust.”
5. “Having to come here each week irritates you, and
I gather you may be disappointed that I am
encouraging you to follow the judge’s order.”
6. “Look, you got yourself into this mess so don’t
complain to me if you don’t like it. Maybe you’d
like to talk the judge into changing his mind.”
7. “It irritates you to have to come here each week.
You’d like to get me off your back.”
8. “You’re confused about why you have to come
here and wish you didn’t have to.”

Client Statement

3. Group member [in hesitant, quiet voice]: It’s really
hard for me to say what I want to say in this group.
When I do start to talk, I get tongue-tied, and my
heart starts beating faster and faster. I feel like
some of you are critical of me.

Possible Responses (By Group Members or
Group Leader)

1. “Yeah, I feel that same way sometimes, too.”
2. “It is frightening to you to try to share your feelings with the group. Sounds like you find yourself
at a loss for words and wonder what others are
thinking of you.”
3. “I know you’re timid, but I think it’s important
that you make more of an effort to talk in the
group, just like you’re doing now. It’s actually
one of the responsibilities of being a group
member.”
4. “You get scared when you try to talk in the group.”
5. “I sense that you’re probably feeling pretty tense
and tied up inside right now as you talk about
the fear you’ve had in expressing yourself.”
6. “Although you’ve been frightened of exposing
yourself, I gather there’s a part of you that wants
to overcome that fear and become more actively
involved with the rest of the group.”
7. “What makes you think we’re critical of you? You
come across as a bit self-conscious, but that’s no
big deal.”
8. “You remind me of the way I felt the first time I
was in a group. I was so scared, I just looked at the
floor most of the time.”

109

9. “I wonder if we’ve done anything that came across
as being critical of you.”

Client Statement

4. A homeless client who has been referred to a housing program [when asked by the social worker
about what led to his losing his job]: Budget cuts,
layoffs, and I did not have seniority.

Possible Responses

1. “How did you feel about that?”
2. “So several things, including budget cuts, layoffs,
and low seniority, contributed to your losing
your job and contributed to your homelessness.”
3. “How long have you been homeless?”
4. “Don’t you think you have some responsibility for
losing your job?”

RESPONDING WITH RECIPROCAL
EMPATHY
Reciprocal or interchangeable empathic
responding (Level 3) is a basic skill used
throughout the helping process to acknowledge client messages and to encourage
exploration of problems. In the initial
EP 6
phase, empathic responding serves a vital
purpose in individual, conjoint, and group sessions:
It facilitates the development of a working relationship and fosters the climate of understanding necessary to promote communication and self-disclosure.
In this way, it sets the stage for deeper exploration
of feelings during subsequent phases of the helping
process.
Note that the benefits of making additive empathic
responses at Levels 4 and 5 are not contingent on the
frequency of their usage. In fact, making one such
response in a first or second interview may be helpful
and appropriate. More frequent attempts presume a
depth of relationship that has not yet developed. Additive empathic responses often exceed the level of feelings and meanings expressed by clients during early
sessions and are thus reserved, in large part, for later
phases of the helping process.
Because reciprocal responding is an essential
skill used frequently to meet the objectives of the first
phase of the helping process, we recommend that you
first aim to achieve beginning mastery of responding




110

PART 2 / Exploring, Assessing, and Planning

at Level 3. Extended practice of this skill should
significantly increase your effectiveness in establishing
viable helping relationships, interviewing, and gathering data. The remainder of this chapter provides guidelines and practice exercises that will help you in
mastering reciprocal responding. Although responding
at additive levels represents an extension of the skill of
reciprocal responding, it is an advanced skill that can
be used in a variety of ways to achieve specific objectives. For this reason, it has been grouped with other
change-oriented or “action” skills presented in Part 3 of
the book.

Constructing Reciprocal Responses
To reach Level 3 on the empathic scale, you must be
able to formulate responses that accurately capture the
content and the surface feelings in the client message. It
is also important to frame the message so that you do
not merely restate the client’s message.
The following paradigm, which identifies the elements of an empathic or reflective message, has proven
useful for conceptualizing and mastering the skill of
empathic responding:
You feel

about

because
.
Accurately
identifies or
describes
feelings

The response focuses exclusively on the client’s
message and does not reflect the social worker’s
conceptualizations.
The following excerpt from a session involving
a social worker and a 17-year-old female illustrates
the use of the preceding paradigm in constructing an
empathic response.
Client: I can’t talk to my father without feeling scared
and crying. I’d like to be able to express myself and
to disagree with him, but I just can’t.
Social worker: It sounds as though you just feel panicky
when you try to talk to your father. You feel down
on yourself, because at this point you can’t say what
you want without falling apart.
This message conveys a reflection with a twist, which
we will explore more in the following chapter (Miller &
Rollnick, 2002). That is, it reflects the client’s current
feeling but implies that it could change at another point
when she acquires more confidence and skill (Greene,

Lee, & Hoffpauir, 2005). Many times, client messages
contain conflicting or contrasting emotions, such as the
following: “I like taking drugs, but sometimes I worry
about what they might do to me.” In such cases, each
contrasting feeling should be highlighted:
●
●

You feel _______, yet you also feel ________.
I sense that you feel torn because while you find
taking drugs enjoyable, you have nagging thoughts
that they might be harmful to you.

Note that such highlighting of opposing feelings is a
key technique for assisting clients in assessing their
readiness for change in the motivational interviewing
method (Miller & Rollnick, 2002).
Remember that to respond empathically at a reciprocal level, you must use language that your clients will
readily understand. Abstract, intellectualized language
and professional jargon create barriers to communication and should be avoided. It is also important to vary
the language you use in responding. Many professionals tend to respond with stereotyped, repetitive
speech patterns, commonly using a limited variety of
leads to begin their empathic responses. Such leads as
“You feel …” and “I hear you saying …” repeated over
and over not only distract the client but also seem
phony and contrived. This kind of stereotyped
responding draws more attention to the social worker’s
technique than to his or her message. One of the many
advantages to audio or video recording your own work
is that these habitual responses—often so instinctive
that you don’t notice them—will become readily apparent to you.
Below you will find a list of varied introductory
phrases that will help you expand your repertoire of
possible responses. We encourage you to read the list
aloud several times and to review it frequently while
practicing the empathic communication training exercises in this chapter and in Chapter 17, which covers
additive empathic responding. The reciprocal empathic
response format (“You feel _____ because _____”) is
merely a training tool to assist you in focusing on the
affect and content of client messages. The leads list
below will help you respond more naturally.
Leads for Empathic Responses
Could it be that …
I wonder if …
What I guess I’m hearing
is …

You’re feeling …
I’m not sure if I’m with
you but …
You appear to be feeling ...




C H A P T E R 5 / Building Blocks of Communication: Conveying Empathy and Authenticity

Correct me if I’m wrong,
but I’m sensing …
Perhaps you’re feeling …
Sometimes you think …
Maybe this is a long shot,
but …
I’m not certain I
understand; you’re
feeling …
As I hear it, you …
Is that the way you feel?
The message I’m
getting is that …
Let me see if I’m with
you; you …
If I’m hearing you
correctly …
So, you’re feeling …
You feel …
It sounds as though you
are saying …
I hear you saying …
So, from where you sit …
I sense that you’re
feeling …
Your message seems
to be …
I gather you’re feeling …
If I’m catching what
you say …
What you’re saying
comes across to me as …

It appears you feel …
Maybe you feel …
Do you feel …
I’m not sure that I’m with
you; do you mean …
It seems that you …
Is that what you mean?
What I think I’m
hearing is …
I get the impression
that …
As I get it, you felt
that …
To me it’s almost like
you are saying …
So, as you see it …
I’m picking up that
you …
I wonder if you’re
saying …
So, it seems to you …
Right now you’re
feeling …
You must have felt …
Listening to you, it
seems as if …
You convey a sense of …
As I think about what
you say, it occurs to me
you’re feeling …
From what you say …
I gather you’re
feeling …

Exercises designed to help you to develop Level 3
reciprocal empathic responses appear at the end of
the chapter and in the Practice Behaviors Workbook.
Included in the exercises are a variety of client statements taken from actual work with individuals, groups,
couples, and families in diverse settings. In addition to
the skill development exercises, we recommend that you
record the number of empathic responses you employ
in sessions over several weeks to determine the extent to
which you are applying this skill. We also suggest that
either you or a knowledgeable associate rate your
responses and determine the mean level of empathic

111

responding for each session. If you find (as most beginning social workers do) that you are underutilizing
empathic responses or responding at low levels, you
may wish to set a goal to improve your skill.

Employing Empathic Responding
In early sessions with the client, empathic responding
should be used frequently as a method of developing
rapport with the client. Responses should be couched
in a tentative manner to allow for inaccuracies in the
social worker’s perception. Checking out the accuracy
of responses with appropriate lead-in phrases such as
“Let me see if I understand …” or “Did I hear you
right?” is helpful in communicating a desire to understand and a willingness to correct misperceptions.
In initially using empathic responses, learners are
often leery of the flood of emotions that sometimes
occurs as the client, experiencing none of the usual
barriers to communication, releases feelings that may
have been pent up for months or years. It is important
to understand that empathic responses have not
“caused” such feelings but rather have facilitated their
expression, thus clearing the way for the client to
explore and to consider such feelings more rationally
and objectively.
You may worry, as do many beginning social
workers, about whether you will “damage” the client
or disrupt the helping relationship if your empathic
responses do not always accurately reflect the client’s
feelings. Perhaps even more important than accuracy,
however, is the commitment to understand conveyed
by your genuine efforts to perceive the client’s experience. If you consistently demonstrate your goodwill
and intent to help through attentive verbal and nonverbal responding, an occasional lack of understanding or
faulty timing will not damage the client–social worker
relationship. In fact, your efforts to clarify the client’s
message will usually enhance rather than detract from
the helping process, particularly if you respond to
corrective feedback in an open, nondefensive, and
empathic manner.

Multiple Uses of Empathic
Communication
Earlier in the chapter, we referred to the versatility of
empathic communication. In this section, we delineate
a number of ways in which you can employ reciprocal
empathic responding.




